Beehive
Textbook in English for Class IX
2019-20ISBN 81-7450-502-4
First Edition
February 2006 Phalguna 1927
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
Reprinted
October 2006 Kartika 1928
October 2007 Kartika 1929
December 2009 Agrahayana 1931
January 2011 Magha 1932
January 2012 Pausa 1933
December 2012 Agrahayana 1934
February 2014 Magha 1935
December 2014 Pausa 1936
December 2015 Agrahayana 1937
December 2016 Pausa 1938
December 2017 Pausa 1939
December 2018 Agrahayana 1940
qNo part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior
permission of the publisher.
qThis book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of
trade, be lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the
publisher’s consent, in any form of binding or cover other than that in
which it is published.
qThe correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any
revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other
means is incorrect and should be unacceptable.
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
PD 500T BS
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2006
` 75.00
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New Delhi 110 016Phone : 011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O. Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014Phone : 079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114Phone : 033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021Phone : 0361-2674869
Publication Team
Printed on 80 GSM paper with
NCERT watermark
Published at the Publication Division
by the Secretary, National Council
of Educational Research and
Training, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New
Delhi 110016 and printed at
Sanjeev Offset Printers, L-39,
Sector-5, Bawana Industrial
Area, Delhi- 110039
2019-20
Head, Publication
Division: M. Siraj Anwar
Chief Editor: Shveta Uppal
Chief Business
Manager: Gautam Ganguly
Chief Production
Officer: Arun Chitkara
Editor: Vijayam
Sankaranarayanan
Production Officer: Abdul Naim
Cover, Illustrations and Layout
Nidhi WadhwaFOREWORD
THE National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends that
children’s life at school must be linked to their life outside the school. This
principle marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learning which
continues to shape our system and causes a gap between the school, home
and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed on the basis of NCF
signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. They also attempt to
discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp boundaries between
different subject areas. We hope these measures will take us significantly
further in the direction of a child-centred system of education outlined in
the National Policy of Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals
and teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning
and to pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise that,
given space, time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging
with the information passed on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed
textbook as the sole basis of examination is one of the key reasons why other
resources and sites of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and
initiative is possible if we perceive and treat children as participants in
learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of
functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in
implementing the annual calendar so that the required number of teaching
days are actually devoted to teaching. The methods used for teaching and
evaluation will also determine how effective this textbook proves for making
children’s life at school a happy experience, rather than a source of stress
or boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address the problem of
curricular burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different
stages with greater consideration for child psychology and the time available
for teaching. The textbook attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving
higher priority and space to opportunities for contemplation and wondering,
discussion in small groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT)
appreciates the hard work done by the textbook development committee
responsible for this book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory
group in languages, Professor Namwar Singh and the Chief Advisor for
this book, Professor R. Amritavalli for guiding the work of this committee.
Several teachers contributed to the development of this textbook; we are
2019-20grateful to their principals for making this possible. We are indebted to
the institutions and organisations which have generously permitted us to
draw upon their resources, materials and personnel. We are especially
grateful to the members of the National Monitoring Committee, appointed
by the Department of Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of Human
Resource Development under the Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri
and Professor G.P. Deshpande for their valuable time and contribution.
As an organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous
improvement in the quality of its products, NCERT welcomes comments
and suggestions which will enable us to undertake further revision
and refinements.
Director
National Council of Educational
Research and Training
New Delhi
20 December 2005
iv
2019-20TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT
COMMITTEE
CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY GROUP IN LANGUAGES
Professor Namwar Singh, formerly Chairman, School of Languages,
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
CHIEF ADVISOR
R. Amritavalli, Professor, Central Institute of English and Foreign
Languages (CIEFL), Hyderabad
CHIEF COORDINATOR
Ram Janma Sharma, Professor and Head, Department of Languages, NCERT,
New Delhi
MEMBERS
Amber Banerjee, Principal, Dehli Public School, Dagapur, Darjeeling Road,
Pradhan Nagar, Siliguri
Nasiruddin Khan, Reader in English, Department of Languages, NCERT,
New Delhi
S. Neerada, Principal, Kendriya Vidyalaya, AF 8, Rajokri, New Delhi
Sadhana Parashar, AEO (ELT), CBSE, 17, Rouse Avenue, Institutional Area,
New Delhi
Shruti Sircar, Lecturer, Centre for ESL Studies, CIEFL, Hyderabad
Sonia Makhija, TGT (English), Govt Girls’ Secondary School No. 3, Uttam
Nagar, New Delhi
MEMBER-COORDINATOR
Sandhya Rani Sahoo, Reader in English, Department of Languages, NCERT,
New Delhi
2019-20ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
THE National Council of Educational Research and Training is grateful
to Professor M.L. Tickoo, formerly of the Central Institute of English and
Foreign Languages, Hyderabad, and the Regional Language Centre,
Singapore, for going through the manuscript and making valuable
suggestions.
For permission to reproduce copyright material in this book NCERT
would like to thank the following: Voyager, London for ‘The Fun They Had’
by Isaac Asimov; Oxford University Press, New Delhi, for ‘Evelyn Glennie
Listens to Sound without Hearing It’ by Deborah Cowley from Broadway,
Coursebook 8; Wordsworth Edition Limited, Hertfordshire for ‘The Duck and
the Kangaroo’ by Edward Lear; CBSE, New Delhi for ‘On Killing a Tree’
by Gieve Patel; Adrian Berry, Shefield, U.K. for the two photographs of
Santosh Yadav.
Special thanks are also due to the Publication Department, NCERT,
for their support. NCERT gratefully acknowledges the contributions
made by Matthew John, Proof Reader; and Achin Jain and Arvind Sharma,
DTP Operators.
2019-20Contents
FOREWORD . . . . . iii
NOTES FOR THE TEACHER . . . . . 1
Units 1–3
1. The Fun They Had . . . . . 5
Isaac Asimov
The Road Not Taken . . . . . 15
Robert Frost
2. The Sound of Music . . . . . 17
I. EVELYN GLENNIE: Deborah Cowley
II. BISMILLAH KHAN
Wind . . . . . 30
Subramania Bharati
3. The Little Girl . . . . . 32
Katherine Mansfield
Rain on the Roof . . . . . 41
Coates Kinney
NOTES FOR THE TEACHER . . . . . 43
Units 4–7
4. A Truly Beautiful Mind . . . . . 46
The Lake Isle of Innisfree . . . . . 54
William Butler Yeats
5. The Snake and the Mirror . . . . . 56
Vaikom Muhammad Basheer
A Legend of the Northland . . . . . 65
Phoebe Cary
2019-206. My Childhood . . . . . 68
A. P. J. Abdul Kalam
No Men Are Foreign . . . . . 80
James Kirkup
7. Packing . . . . . 82
Jerome K. Jerome
The Duck and the Kangaroo . . . . . 94
Edward Lear
NOTES FOR THE TEACHER . . . . . 97
Units 8 –11
8. Reach for the Top . . . . . 99
I. SANTOSH YADAV
II. MARIA SHARAPOVA
On Killing a Tree . . . . . 110
Gieve Patel
9. The Bond of Love . . . . . 113
Kenneth Anderson
The Snake Trying . . . . . 125
W. W. E. Ross
10. Kathmandu . . . . . 127
Vikram Seth
A Slumber Did My Spirit Seal . . . . . 136
William Wordsworth
11. If I Were You . . . . . 138
Douglas James
viii
2019-20eacher
Notes for the T
Teacher
Beehive, a textbook in English for Class IX, is based on the new syllabus in
English which was prepared as a follow-up to the National Curriculum
Framework , 2005. The curriculum calls for an approach that is rich in
comprehensible input and adopts a language-across-the-curriculum,
multilingual perspective. This reader aims at helping the child to read for
meaning, and to learn to communicate in English with confidence and
accuracy.
Care has been taken to give a central place to the learner in the process
of teaching and learning. Learner-friendly language has been used in
the instructions, and the exercises and activities are addressed to the
child. In this process the teacher is a facilitator or a co-learner.
A rich variety of reading material has been provided to include the literary,
cultural and sociological dimensions of texts. The themes range from
childhood and adolescence, to disability, talent and achievement, to
music, science, and contemporary social and environmental concerns.
The range is as inclusive as possible, keeping in view the interest and
cognitive development of the learners. The book draws on different genres
such as story, biography and autobiography; science fiction; humour;
travelogue; and the one-act play.
The number of poems has been increased to help learners explore this
great source of language, derive the joy of learning through poetry, and
understand the music of words. An attempt has been made to include
different types of poems such as the lyric, the ballad and the humorous
poem.
The poems have been chosen for their simplicity and suitability in terms
of language and thought. We need not talk about the poet or the
background to the poem, unless the poem seems to demand it. Nor
should we attempt to exhaust all the possibilities of a poem; we should
encourage the students to begin to see some of the possibilities. They
should be guided to apprehend the poem through the visual, the auditory,
the tactile, the intellectual, or the emotional channels, and to understand
the suggestiveness of the images.
An attempt has been made to help the learner develop the skill of
predicting and anticipating what follows. Every good reader should guess
what is coming next. The task ‘Before You Read’ given at the beginning
2019-20of each unit is designed for this purpose. Learners should be encouraged
to participate in this activity.
The section ‘Thinking about the Text’ attempts to move from surface
level understanding of the text to critical thinking. The comprehension
exercises given here try to help the learners infer meaning. There are a
few questions which ask for the readers’ judgment; they aim to bring
out the learners’ deeper understanding of the text.
In the section ‘Thinking about Language’:
• Vocabulary enrichment has been attempted through a variety of
tasks on the usage of words closely related in meaning, matching
words to meanings, word building (including phrasal verbs), and
reference to the dictionary. An activity on the use of the index has
been included.
• Attention has been drawn to grammar-in-context that emerges out of
the reading text, e.g. the use of the tenses and voice, reported speech,
conditional and subordinate clauses or phrases, and adverbs.
The communicative skills have been exercised by tasks on Speaking
and Writing. The Speaking tasks call for learners to work in pairs or
groups, (for example) to present an argument, express a viewpoint,
express contrasts, seek or give an opinion, introduce a speaker, tell a
story, enact or read out a play in parts, etc.
There are a variety of writing tasks: help writing newspaper report, an
article for a school magazine, argumentative writing, narration,
description, and picture interpretation.
A small attempt has been made to relate speech and writing by pointing
out similarities and differences. Opportunities for writing in groups and
pairs are provided to get into the task.
We have introduced the old exercise of dictation again but from a
completely different perspective. Dictation has been introduced in its
current, updated form as a variety of activities designed to integrate the
language skills of listening, prior reading, language processing and recall,
and writing, including the appropriate use of punctuation in meaningful
contexts.
Some exercises also allow scope for the learners’ languages to support
one another’s by asking for reflection on relevant words, or poems or
stories in other languages; and attempt (preliminary as they may be) to
attend to the process of translation. Activities have been suggested to
bring out the relatedness of the learners’ school subjects.
2 / Beehive
2019-20Units 1–3
1. THE FUN THEY HAD
This story takes us to the world of the future where computers will play
a major role. Let the children talk freely about how they imagine the
schools of the future that their own children might go to. You might want
to explain the ideas of ‘virtual reality’ and ‘virtual classroom’. The term
‘virtual reality’ refers to a reality created by computer software, and a
‘virtual classroom’ is not a real classroom but one where learning is
through computer software or the Internet. The children may know what
a robot is, and be able to guess what a robotic teacher would be.
In this unit students are required to present their arguments in a debate.
The following points could be explained before the task.
• A debate is a contest between two speakers or two groups of speakers
to show skill and ability in arguing.
• A proposition, a question or a problem is required for this purpose,
which can be spoken for or against.
• To participate in a debate, one must prepare for it.
So, one must
prepare an outline of the main points in the order in which one is
going to argue.
• The time limit is about four to five minutes.
• The speaker addresses the audience.
• Every topic/subject has its own vocabulary. These must be learnt.
• The speaker addresses the chair (Mr President/Madam), ‘submits’
an argument, ‘appeals’ for sympathetic understanding and support,
‘questions’ the opponent’s views, and ‘concludes’ an argument.
2. THE SOUND OF MUSIC
These biographical pieces tell us of people who have achieved success
and recognition through determination, hard work and courage. The
children may be asked to think of potential barriers to success, and of
people who have overcome them. The second part of the unit encourages
students to think about the rich heritage of Indian music, and our musical
instruments. The portraits of musicians given in the beginning may be
supplemented by others that the children can be asked to bring to class.
A comprehension exercise in Part II encourages children to find words in
the text that express attitudes (positive, negative or neutral) to events,
places, etc. Encourage the children to compare and discuss their answers.
Dictionary entries give us different kinds of information about words. Children
need help in using the dictionary to find specific kinds of information.
Notes for the Teacher / 3
2019-20This unit has an exercise that asks students to consult a dictionary and
find out which adjective can be used before a noun, which can be used
after a verb, and which can be used in both ways. You may add some
adjectives to those suggested. Encourage the children also to find more
adjectives of the kinds mentioned. Students may wish to consult (in
addition to the Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary), the Longman
Dictionary of Contemporary English, the Collins Cobuild Advanced Learner’s
English Dictionary, and the Word Master (Orient Longman), or any good
dictionary of their choice.
The Speaking exercise asks the students to imagine introducing a
celebrity guest to an audience. It can be made an authentic activity if
students are given a couple of minutes during the morning assembly to
speak to their fellow-pupils about such a person. This would give them
practice in facing an audience, and encourage them to prepare seriously,
by: (i) noting down the important points about the person to be
introduced, (ii) using appropriate phrases to introduce the person
(students should be allowed to think what phrases they want to use).
The Writing Task is an exercise in comparison. Hard work is a trait common
to Evelyn Glennie (Part I, para 5) and Bismillah Khan (Part II, para 5).
Help children identify the paragraphs that tell us about the two musicians’
goals. After they read and understand these parts of the text, they can
organise the ideas in two paragraphs, one on each musician.
3. THE LITTLE GIRL
The aim in this unit is to first read through the story at one go, not worrying
about difficult words or difficult language. Students can read the story for
homework and come to class; or the teacher can read out the story in
class; or the students can read out parts of the story in the class, one
after the other. Let them retell the story again, if necessary, in parts.
The dictionary exercise in this unit shows how a very small common
word can be used in different ways. Students might be interested in
thinking about how they use words in their own language to express
these meanings. They may also think of other words like same, small,
give and take to convey different kids of meaning. Encourage them to
consult a dictionary.
This is a story about the changing attitude of a girl child towards her
father. The Speaking and Writing exercises encourage the students to
think about the relationship between children and parents. The students
should be encouraged to say or write what they think, and not what the
teacher thinks they should say or write. The aim is not to arrive at
a ‘correct’ answer, but to let every child voice an opinion and express
her/his ideas. It is hoped that children will find the topic of personal
relevance. This will help their ideas and language to flow freely.
4 / Beehive
2019-201. The FFun
un They Had
BEFORE YOU READ
•
The story we shall read is set in the future, when books and
schools as we now know them will perhaps not exist. How
will children study then? The diagram below may give you
some ideas.
Learning
through
computers
Virtual
classroom
Schools of
the Future
Robotic
teacher
Moving
e-text
•In pairs, discuss three things that you like best about your
school and three things about your school that you would
like to change. Write them down.
•Have you ever read words on a television (or computer) screen?
Can you imagine a time when all books will be on computers,
and there will be no books printed on paper? Would you like
such books better?
1. MARGIE even wrote about it that night in her diary.
On the page headed 17 May 2157, she wrote, “Today
Tommy found a real book!”
It was a very old book. Margie’s grandfather once
said that when he was a little boy his grandfather
2019-20told him that there was a time when all stories
were printed on paper.
They turned the pages, which were yellow and
crinkly, and it was awfully funny to read words
that stood still instead of moving the way they were
supposed to — on a screen, you know. And then
when they turned back to the page before, it had
the same words on it that it had had when they
read it the first time.
2. “Gee,” said Tommy, “what a waste. When you’re
through with the book, you just throw it away, I
guess. Our television screen must have had a million
books on it and it’s good for plenty more. I wouldn’t
throw it away.”
“Same with mine,” said Margie. She was eleven
and hadn’t seen as many telebooks as Tommy had.
He was thirteen.
She said, “Where did you find it?”
“In my house.” He pointed without looking,
because he was busy reading. “In the attic.”
“What’s it about?”
“School.”
3. Margie was scornful. “School? What’s there to write
about school? I hate school.”
Margie always hated school, but now she hated
it more than ever. The mechanical teacher had been
giving her test after test in geography and she had
been doing worse and worse until her mother had
shaken her head sorrowfully and sent for the County
Inspector.
4. He was a round little man with a red face and a
whole box of tools with dials and wires. He smiled
at Margie and gave her an apple, then took the
teacher apart. Margie had hoped he wouldn’t know
how to put it together again, but he knew how all
right, and, after an hour or so, there it was again,
large and black and ugly, with a big screen on which
all the lessons were shown and the questions were
asked. That wasn’t so bad. The part Margie hated
6 / Beehive
2019-20
crinkly: with many
folds or lines
attic: a space just
below the roof, used
as a storeroom
scornful:
contemptuous;
showing you think
something is
worthlessmost was the slot where she had to put homework
and test papers. She always had to write them out
in a punch code they made her learn when she was
six years old, and the mechanical teacher calculated
the marks in no time.
5. The Inspector had smiled after he was finished and
patted Margie’s head. He said to her mother, “It’s
not the little girl’s fault, Mrs Jones. I think the
geography sector was geared a little too quick. Those
things happen sometimes. I’ve slowed it up to an
average ten-year level. Actually, the overall pattern
of her progress is quite satisfactory.” And he patted
Margie’s head again.
Margie was disappointed. She had been hoping
they would take the teacher away altogether. They
had once taken Tommy’s teacher away for nearly a
month because the history sector had blanked out
completely.
So she said to Tommy, “Why would anyone write
about school?”
6. Tommy looked at her with very superior eyes.
“Because it’s not our kind of school, stupid. This is
the old kind of school that they had hundreds and
hundreds of years ago.” He added loftily,
pronouncing the word carefully, “Centuries ago.”
Margie was hurt. “Well, I don’t know what
kind of school they had all that time ago.” She read
the book over his shoulder for a while, then said,
“Anyway, they had a teacher.”
slot: a given space,
time or position
geared (to): adjusted
to a particular
standard or level
loftily: in a superior
way
They had a teacher... It was a man.
The Fun They Had / 7
2019-20“Sure they had a teacher, but it wasn’t a regular
teacher. It was a man.”
“A man? How could a man be a teacher?”
“Well, he just told the boys and girls things and
gave them homework and asked them questions.”
7. “A man isn’t smart enough.”
“Sure he is. My father knows as much as my
teacher.”
“He knows almost as much, I betcha.”
Margie wasn’t prepared to dispute that. She said,
“I wouldn’t want a strange man in my house to
teach me.”
Tommy screamed with laughter. “You don’t know
much, Margie. The teachers didn’t live in the
house. They had a special building and all the
kids went there.”
“And all the kids learned the same thing?”
“Sure, if they were the same age.”
8. “But my mother says a teacher has to be adjusted to
fit the mind of each boy and girl it teaches and that
each kid has to be taught differently.”
“Just the same they didn’t do it that way then.
If you don’t like it, you don’t have to read the book.”
“I didn’t say I didn’t like it,” Margie said quickly.
She wanted to read about those funny schools.
They weren’t even half finished when Margie’s
mother called, “Margie! School!”
Margie looked up. “Not yet, Mamma.”
“Now!” said Mrs Jones. “And it’s probably time
for Tommy, too.”
Margie said to Tommy, “Can I read the book some
more with you after school?”
9. “May be,” he said nonchalantly. He walked away
whistling, the dusty old book tucked beneath
his arm.
Margie went into the schoolroom. It was right
next to her bedroom, and the mechanical teacher
was on and waiting for her. It was always on at the
same time every day except Saturday and Sunday,
8 / Beehive
2019-20
regular: here,
normal; of the usual
kind
betcha (informal):
(I) bet you (in fast
speech): I’ m sure
dispute: disagree
with
nonchalantly: not
showing much
interest or
enthusiasm;
carelesslyThe mechanical teacher was flashing on the screen...
because her mother said little girls learned better
if they learned at regular hours.
The screen was lit up, and it said: “Today’s
arithmetic lesson is on the addition of proper
fractions. Please insert yesterday’s homework in the
proper slot.”
10. Margie did so with a sigh. She was thinking about
the old schools they had when her grandfather’s
grandfather was a little boy. All the kids from the
whole neighborhood came, laughing and shouting
in the schoolyard, sitting together in the schoolroom,
going home together at the end of the day. They
learned the same things, so they could help one
another with the homework and talk about it.
And the teachers were people…
The mechanical teacher was flashing on the
screen: “When we add fractions ½ and ¼...”
Margie was thinking about how the kids must
have loved it in the old days. She was thinking
about the fun they had.
ISAAC ASIMOV
The Fun They Had / 9
2019-20Thinking about the T
Teext
Activity
Calculate how many years and months ahead from now Margie’s
diary entry is.
I. Answer these questions in a few words or a couple of sentences each.
1. How old are Margie and Tommy?
2. What did Margie write in her diary?
3. Had Margie ever seen a book before?
4. What things about the book did she find strange?
5. What do you think a telebook is?
6. Where was Margie’s school? Did she have any classmates?
7. What subjects did Margie and Tommy learn?
II. Answer the following with reference to the story.
1. “I wouldn’t throw it away.”
(i) Who says these words?
(ii) What does ‘it’ refer to?
(iii) What is it being compared with by the speaker?
2. “Sure they had a teacher, but it wasn’t a regular teacher. It was a man.”
(i) Who does ‘they’ refer to?
(ii) What does ‘regular’ mean here?
(iii) What is it contrasted with?
III. Answer each of these questions in a short paragraph (about 30 words).
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
What kind of teachers did Margie and Tommy have?
Why did Margie’s mother send for the County Inspector?
What did he do?
Why was Margie doing badly in geography? What did the County Inspector
do to help her?
What had once happened to Tommy’s teacher?
Did Margie have regular days and hours for school? If so, why?
How does Tommy describe the old kind of school?
How does he describe the old kind of teachers?
IV. Answer each of these questions in two or three paragraphs (100 –150 words).
1. What are the main features of the mechanical teachers and the schoolrooms
that Margie and Tommy have in the story?
2. Why did Margie hate school? Why did she think the old kind of school must
have been fun?
10 / Beehive
2019-203. Do you agree with Margie that schools today are more fun than the school in
the story? Give reasons for your answer.
Thinking about Language
I. Adverbs
Read this sentence taken from the story:
They had once taken Tommy’s teacher away for nearly a month because the
history sector had blanked out completely.
The word complete is an adjective. When you add –ly to it, it becomes an adverb.
1. Find the sentences in the lesson which have the adverbs given in the box
below.
awfully
carefully
sorrowfully
differently
completely
quickly
loftily
nonchalantly
2. Now use these adverbs to fill in the blanks in the sentences below.
(i) The report must be read
improved.
so that performance can be
(ii) At the interview, Sameer answered our questions
shrugging his shoulders.
(iii) We all behave
when we are tired or hungry.
(iv) The teacher shook her head
(v) I
,
when Ravi lied to her.
forgot about it.
(vi) When I complimented Revathi on her success, she just smiled
and turned away.
(vii) The President of the Company is
be able to meet you.
(viii) I finished my work
busy and will not
so that I could go out to play.
Remember:
An adverb describes action. You can form adverbs by adding –ly to adjectives.
Spelling Note: When an adjective ends in –y, the y changes to i when you
add –ly to form an adverb.
For example: angr-y → angr-i-ly
The Fun They Had / 11
2019-203. Make adverbs from these adjectives.
(i) angry(ii) happy
(iii) merry(iv) sleepy
(v) easy(vi) noisy
(vii) tidy(viii) gloomy
II. If Not and Unless
• Imagine that Margie’s mother told her, “You’ll feel awful if you don’t finish
your history lesson.”
• She could also say: “You’ll feel awful unless you finish your history lesson.”
Unless means if not. Sentences with unless or if not are negative conditional
sentences.
Notice that these sentences have two parts. The part that begins with if not or
unless tells us the condition. This part has a verb in the present tense (look at
the verbs don’t finish, finish in the sentences above).
The other part of the sentence tells us about a possible result. It tells us what
will happen (if something else doesn’t happen). The verb in this part of the
sentence is in the future tense ( you’ll feel/you will feel ).
Notice these two tenses again in the following examples.
Future Tense
Present Tense
• There won’t be any books leftunless
• You won’t learn your lessonsif
• Tommy will have an accidentunless
we preserve them.
you don’t study regularly.
he drives more slowly.
Complete the following conditional sentences. Use the correct form of the verb.
1. If I don’t go to Anu’s party tonight,
2. If you don’t telephone the hotel to order food,
3. Unless you promise to write back, I
4. If she doesn’t play any games,
5. Unless that little bird flies away quickly, the cat
Writing
A new revised volume of Issac Asimov’s short stories has just been released.
Order one set. Write a letter to the publisher, Mindfame Private Limited, 1632
Asaf Ali Road, New Delhi, requesting that a set be sent to you by Value Payable
Post (VPP), and giving your address. Your letter will have the following parts.
12 / Beehive
2019-20•Addresses of the sender and receiver
•The salutation
•The body of the letter
•The closing phrases and signature
Your letter might look like this:
Your address
Date
(DD/MM/YY)
The addressee’s address
Dear Sir/Madam,
Yours sincerely,
Your signature
Remember that the language of a formal letter is different from the
colloquial style of personal letters. For example, contracted forms
such as ‘I’ve’ or ‘can’t’ are not used.
The Fun They Had / 13
2019-20Speaking
In groups of four discuss the following topic.
‘The Schools of the Future Will Have No Books and No Teachers!’
Your group can decide to speak for or against the motion. After this, each group
will select a speaker to present its views to the entire class.
You may find the following phrases useful to present your argument in the debate.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
In my opinion . . .
I/we fail to understand why . . .
I wholeheartedly support/oppose the view that . . .
At the outset let me say . . .
I’d/we’d like to raise the issue of/argue against . . .
I should like to draw attention to . . .
My/our worthy opponent has submitted that . . .
On the contrary . . .
I firmly reject . . .
Do a Project
Nowadays use of digital devices has increased and digital services have made
our cash transactions easier and smoother. Government of India has taken
initiatives to digitalise cash transactions to buy things and pay bills. Following
are some of the digital initiatives to make people use digital services.
Take up a project in groups of four to collect opinions of people on the use of
digital services in their daily life. Develop an opionnaire to collect opinions of
about forty people in your neighbourhood. Divide the work among four to collect
the opinions, tabulate the ideas and write a report about the use of digital
devices. Once the project is completed, each group may present it to the whole
class. Charts may be created and displayed on the notice board.
14 / Beehive
2019-20ak
en
The Road Not T
aken
Tak
This well-known poem is about making choices, and the
choices that shape us. Robert Frost is an American poet who
writes simply, but insightfully, about common, ordinary
experiences.
Two roads diverged in a yellow wood,
And sorry I could not travel both
And be one traveller, long I stood
And looked down one as far as I could
To where it bent in the undergrowth;
Then took the other, just as fair,
And having perhaps the better claim,
Because it was grassy and wanted wear;
Though as for that the passing there
Had worn them really about the same.
And both that morning equally lay
In leaves no step had trodden black.
Oh, I kept the first for another day!
Yet knowing how way leads on to way,
I doubted if I should ever come back.
I shall be telling this with a sigh
Somewhere ages and ages hence;
Two roads diverged in a wood, and I —
I took the one less travelled by,
And that has made all the difference.
ROBERT FROST
2019-20GLOSSARY
diverged: separated and took a different direction
undergrowth: dense growth of plants and bushes
wanted wear: had not been used
hence: here, in the future
Thinking about the Poem
I. 1. Where does the traveller find himself? What problem does he face?
2. Discuss what these phrases mean to you.
(i) a yellow wood
(ii) it was grassy and wanted wear
(iii) the passing there
(iv) leaves no step had trodden black
(v) how way leads on to way
3. Is there any difference between the two roads as the poet describes them
(i) in stanzas two and three?
(ii) in the last two lines of the poem?
4. What do you think the last two lines of the poem mean? (Looking back, does
the poet regret his choice or accept it?)
II. 1. Have you ever had to make a difficult choice (or do you think you will have
difficult choices to make)? How will you make the choice (for what reasons)?
2. After you have made a choice do you always think about what might have
been, or do you accept the reality?
Time is not measured by the passing of years
but by what one does, what one feels, and
what one achieves.
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
16 / Beehive
2019-202. The Sound of Music
Part I
Evelyn Glennie Listens to Sound
without Hearing It
BEFORE YOU READ
•“God may have taken her hearing but he has given her back
something extraordinary. What we hear, she feels — far more
deeply than any of us. That is why she expresses music so
beautifully.”
•Read the following account of a person who fought against a
physical disability and made her life a success story.
1. R U S H hour crowds jostle for position on thejostle: push roughly
underground train platform. A slight girl, looking
younger than her seventeen years, was nervous yet
excited as she felt the vibrations of the approaching
train. It was her first day at the prestigious Royal
Academy of Music in London and daunting enough
for any teenager fresh from a Scottish farm. But
this aspiring musician faced a bigger challenge than
most: she was profoundly deaf.
2. Evelyn Glennie’s loss of hearing had been gradual.
Her mother remembers noticing something was
wrong when the eight-year-old Evelyn was waiting
to play the piano. “They called her name and she
didn’t move. I suddenly realised she hadn’t heard,”
says Isabel Glennie. For quite a while Evelyn
managed to conceal her growing deafness from
friends and teachers. But by the time she was
eleven her marks had deteriorated and her
headmistress urged her parents to take her to aslight: small and
thin
2019-20
daunting: frightening
aspiring musician: a
person who wants
to be a musician3.
4.
5.
6.
specialist. It was then discovered that her hearing
was severely impaired as a result of gradual nerve
damage. They were advised that she should be fitted
with hearing aids and sent to a school for the deaf.
“Everything suddenly looked black,” says Evelyn.
But Evelyn was not going to give up. She was
determined to lead a normal life and pursue her
interest in music. One day she noticed a girl playing
a xylophone and decided that she wanted to play it
too. Most of the teachers discouraged her but
percussionist Ron Forbes spotted her potential. He
began by tuning two large drums to different notes.
“Don’t listen through your ears,” he would say, “try
to sense it some other way.” Says Evelyn, “Suddenly
I realised I could feel the higher drum from the
waist up and the lower one from the waist down.”
Forbes repeated the exercise, and soon Evelyn
discovered that she could sense certain notes in
different parts of her body. “I had learnt to open my
mind and body to sounds and vibrations.” The rest
was sheer determination and hard work.
She never looked back from that point onwards.
She toured the United Kingdom with a youth
orchestra and by the time she was sixteen, she had
decided to make music her life. She auditioned for
the Royal Academy of Music and scored one of the
highest marks in the history of the academy. She
gradually moved from orchestral work to solo
performances. At the end of her three-year course,
she had captured most of the top awards.
And for all this, Evelyn won’t accept any hint of
heroic achievement. “If you work hard and know
where you are going, you’ll get there.” And she got
right to the top, the world’s most sought-after multi-
percussionist with a mastery of some thousand
instruments, and hectic international schedule.
It is intriguing to watch Evelyn function so
effortlessly without hearing. In our two-hour
discussion she never missed a word. “Men with
bushy beards give me trouble,” she laughed. “It is
18 / Beehive
2019-20
impaired: weakened
xylophone: a musical
instrument with a
row of wooden bars
of different lengths
percussionist: a
person who plays the
drum, the tabla, etc.
potential: quality or
ability that can be
developed
auditioned: gave a
short performance so
that the director
could decide whether
she was good enough
intriguing: fascinating
and curiousIt is intriguing to watch Evelyn function
so effortlessly without hearing
not just watching the lips, it’s the whole face,
especially the eyes.” She speaks flawlessly with a
Scottish lilt. “My speech is clear because I could
hear till I was eleven,” she says. But that doesn’t
explain how she managed to learn French and
master basic Japanese.
7. As for music, she explains, “It pours in through
every part of my body. It tingles in the skin, my
cheekbones and even in my hair.” When she plays
the xylophone, she can sense the sound passing up
the stick into her fingertips. By leaning against the
drums, she can feel the resonances flowing into her
body. On a wooden platform she removes her shoes
so that the vibrations pass through her bare feet
and up her legs.
flawlessly: without a
fault or mistake
lilt: a way of
speaking
tingles: causes a
slight pricking or
stinging sensation
resonances: echoes
of sounds
The Sound of Music / 19
2019-208. Not surprisingly, Evelyn delights her audiences. In
1991 she was presented with the Royal
Philharmonic Society’s prestigious Soloist of the Year
Award. Says master percussionist James Blades,
“God may have taken her hearing but he has given
her back something extraordinary. What we hear,
she feels — far more deeply than any of us. That is
why she expresses music so beautifully.”
9. Evelyn confesses that she is something of a
workaholic. “I’ve just got to work . . . often harder
than classical musicians. But the rewards are
enormous.” Apart from the regular concerts, Evelyn
also gives free concerts in prisons and hospitals.
She also gives high priority to classes for young
musicians. Ann Richlin of the Beethoven Fund for
Deaf Children says, “She is a shining inspiration
for deaf children. They see that there is nowhere
that they cannot go.”
10. Evelyn Glennie has already accomplished more than
most people twice her age. She has brought
percussion to the front of the orchestra, and
demonstrated that it can be very moving. She has
given inspiration to those who are handicapped,
people who look to her and say, ‘If she can do it, I
can.’ And, not the least, she has given enormous
pleasure to millions.
workaholic (informal):
a person who finds it
difficult to stop
working
priority: great
importance
DEBORAH COWLEY
Thinking about the T
Teext
I. Answer these questions in a few words or a couple of sentences each.
1. How old was Evelyn when she went to the Royal Academy of Music?
2. When was her deafness first noticed? When was it confirmed?
II. Answer each of these questions in a short paragraph (30 – 40 words).
1. Who helped her to continue with music? What did he do and say?
2. Name the various places and causes for which Evelyn performs.
III. Answer the question in two or three paragraphs (100 –150 words).
1. How does Evelyn hear music?
20 / Beehive
2019-20Part II
The Shehnai of Bismillah Khan
BEFORE YOU READ
•Do you know these people? What instruments do they play?
•Think of the shehnai and the first thing you’ll probably imagine
is a wedding or a similar occasion or function. The next would
probably be Ustad Bismillah Khan, the shehnai maestro,
playing this instrument.
1. EMPEROR Aurangzeb banned the playing of a musical
instrument called pungi in the royal residence for
it had a shrill unpleasant sound. Pungi became the
generic name for reeded noisemakers. Few had
thought that it would one day be revived. A barber
of a family of professional musicians, who had access
to the royal palace, decided to improve the tonal
quality of the pungi. He chose a pipe with a natural
hollow stem that was longer and broader than the
pungi, and made seven holes on the body of the
pipe. When he played on it, closing and opening
some of these holes, soft and melodious sounds were
generic name: a name
given to a class or
group as a whole
reeded: wind
instruments which
have reeds like the
flute, the clarinet, etc.
The Sound of Music / 21
2019-20produced. He played the instrument before royalty
and everyone was impressed. The instrument so
different from the pungi had to be given a new name.
As the story goes, since it was first played in the
Shah’s chambers and was played by a nai (barber),
the instrument was named the ‘shehnai’.
Pungi
Shehnai
2. The sound of the shehnai began to be considered
auspicious. And for this reason it is still played in
temples and is an indispensable component of any
North Indian wedding. In the past, the shehnai was
part of the naubat or traditional ensemble of nine
instruments found at royal courts. Till recently it
was used only in temples and weddings. The credit
for bringing this instrument onto the classical stage
goes to Ustad Bismillah Khan.
3. As a five-year old, Bismillah Khan played gilli-danda
near a pond in the ancient estate of Dumraon in
Bihar. He would regularly go to the nearby Bihariji
temple to sing the Bhojpuri ‘Chaita’, at the end of
which he would earn a big laddu weighing 1.25 kg,
a prize given by the local Maharaja. This happened
80 years ago, and the little boy has travelled far to
earn the highest civilian award in India — the
Bharat Ratna.
4. Born on 21 March 1916, Bismillah belongs to a
well-known family of musicians from Bihar. His
grandfather, Rasool Bux Khan, was the shehnai-
nawaz of the Bhojpur king’s court. His father,
Paigambar Bux, and other paternal ancestors were
also great shehnai players.
22 / Beehive
2019-20
auspicious:
promising to bring
good fortune
indispensable:
without which a
piece of work cannot
be done
ensembles
(pronounced
‘onsomble’): things
(here, instruments)
considered as a group
paternal ancestors:
ancestors of the
father5. The young boy took to music early in life. At the age of
three when his mother took him to his maternal
uncle’s house in Benaras (now Varanasi), Bismillah
was fascinated watching his uncles practise the
shehnai. Soon Bismillah started accompanying his
uncle, Ali Bux, to the Vishnu temple of Benaras where
Bux was employed to play the shehnai. Ali Bux would
play the shehnai and Bismillah would sit captivated
for hours on end. Slowly, he started getting lessons
in playing the instrument and would sit practising
throughout the day. For years to come the temple of
Balaji and Mangala Maiya and the banks of the Ganga
became the young apprentice’s favourite haunts where
he could practise in solitude. The flowing waters of
the Ganga inspired him to improvise and invent raagas
that were earlier considered to be beyond the range
of the shehnai.
6. At the age of 14, Bismillah accompanied his uncle
to the Allahabad Music Conference. At the end of
his recital, Ustad Faiyaz Khan patted the young
boy’s back and said, “Work hard and you shall make
it.” With the opening of the All India Radio in
Lucknow in 1938 came Bismillah’s big break. He
soon became an often-heard shehnai player on radio.
7. When India gained independence on 15 August 1947,
Bismillah Khan became the first Indian to greet the
nation with his shehnai. He poured his heart out
into Raag Kafi from the Red Fort to an audience
which included Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, who later
gave his famous ‘Tryst with Destiny’ speech.
8. Bismillah Khan has given many memorable
performances both in India and abroad. His first
trip abroad was to Afghanistan where King Zahir
Shah was so taken in by the maestro that he gifted
him priceless Persian carpets and other souvenirs.
The King of Afghanistan was not the only one to be
fascinated with Bismillah’s music. Film director
Vijay Bhatt was so impressed after hearing
Bismillah play at a festival that he named a film
after the instrument called Gunj Uthi Shehnai. The
on end: for a very
long time without
stopping
taken in by: attracted
or charmed by
souvenirs: things
given in memory of a
place, person or
event
The Sound of Music / 23
2019-20film was a hit, and one of Bismillah Khan’s
compositions, “Dil ka khilona hai toot gaya ...,” turned
out to be a nationwide chartbuster! Despite this
huge success in the celluloid world, Bismillah
Khan’s ventures in film music were limited to two:
Vijay Bhatt’s Gunj Uthi Shehnai and Vikram
Srinivas’s Kannada venture, Sanadhi Apanna. “I just
can’t come to terms with the artificiality and
glamour of the film world,” he says with emphasis.
9. Awards and recognition came thick and fast.
Bismillah Khan became the first Indian to be invited
to perform at the prestigious Lincoln Centre Hall in
the United States of America. He also took part in
the World Exposition in Montreal, in the Cannes
Art Festival and in the Osaka Trade Fair. So well
known did he become internationally that an
auditorium in Teheran was named after him —
Tahar Mosiquee Ustaad Bismillah Khan.
10. National awards like the Padmashri, the Padma
Bhushan and the Padma Vibhushan were
conferred on him.
11. In 2001, Ustad Bismillah Khan was awarded India’s
highest civilian award, the Bharat Ratna. With the
coveted award resting on his chest and his eyes
glinting with rare happiness he said, “All I would
like to say is: Teach your children music, this is
Hindustan’s richest tradition; even the West is now
coming to learn our music.’’
12. In spite of having travelled all over the world —
Khansaab as he is fondly called — is exceedingly
fond of Benaras and Dumraon and they remain for
him the most wonderful towns of the world. A
student of his once wanted him to head a shehnai
school in the U.S.A., and the student promised to
recreate the atmosphere of Benaras by replicating
the temples there. But Khansaab asked him if he
would be able to transport River Ganga as well.
Later he is remembered to have said, “That is why
whenever I am in a foreign country, I keep yearning
to see Hindustan. While in Mumbai, I think of only
Benaras and the holy Ganga. And while in Benaras,
I miss the unique mattha of Dumraon.”
24 / Beehive
2019-20
chartbuster: record-
breaker
celluloid: old-
fashioned way of
referring to films
venture: project that
often involves risk
conferred: given,
usually an award or
a degree
coveted: much
desiredSHEKHAR GUPTA: When Partition happened, didn’t you and your
family think of moving to Pakistan?
BISMILLAH KHAN: God forbid! Me, leave Benaras? Never! I went
to Pakistan once—I crossed the border just to say I have been
to Pakistan. I was there for about an hour. I said namaskar
to the Pakistanis and salaam alaikum to the Indians! I had a
good laugh.
(Readers’ Digest, October 2005)
13. Ustad Bismillah Khan’s life is a perfect example of
the rich, cultural heritage of India, one that
effortlessly accepts that a devout Muslim like him
can very naturally play the shehnai every morning
at the Kashi Vishwanath temple.
devout: believing
strongly in a religion
and obeying its laws
and following its
practices
[Ustad Bismillah Khan passed away on 21 August 2006 at
the age of ninety after a prolonged illness. He was given a
state funeral and the Government of India declared one day
of national mourning.]
Thinking about the T
Teext
I. Tick the right answer.
1. The (shehnai, pungi ) was a ‘reeded noisemaker.’
2. (Bismillah Khan, A barber, Ali Bux) transformed the pungi into a shehnai.
3. Bismillah Khan’s paternal ancestors were (barbers, professional musicians).
4. Bismillah Khan learnt to play the shehnai from (Ali Bux, Paigambar Bux,
Ustad Faiyaaz Khan).
5. Bismillah Khan’s first trip abroad was to (Afghanistan, U.S.A., Canada).
II. Find the words in the text which show Ustad Bismillah Khan’s feelings about
the items listed below. Then mark a tick (4) in the correct column. Discuss your
answers in class.
Bismillah Khan’s feelings about
Positive
Negative
Neutral
1. teaching children music
2. the film world
3. migrating to the U.S.A.
4. playing at temples
5. getting the Bharat Ratna
6. the banks of the Ganga
7. leaving Benaras and Dumraon
The Sound of Music / 25
2019-20III. Answer these questions in 30– 40 words.
1. Why did Aurangzeb ban the playing of the pungi?
2. How is a shehnai different from a pungi?
3. Where was the shehnai played traditionally? How did Bismillah Khan change
this?
4. When and how did Bismillah Khan get his big break?
5. Where did Bismillah Khan play the shehnai on 15 August 1947? Why was
the event historic?
6. Why did Bismillah Khan refuse to start a shehnai school in the U.S.A.?
7. Find at least two instances in the text which tell you that Bismillah Khan
loves India and Benaras.
Thinking about Language
I. Look at these sentences.
• Evelyn was determined to live a normal life.
• Evelyn managed to conceal her growing deafness from friends and teachers.
The italicised parts answer the questions: “What was Evelyn determined to do?”
and “What did Evelyn manage to do?” They begin with a to-verb (to live, to conceal).
Complete the following sentences. Beginning with a to-verb, try to answer the
questions in brackets.
1. The school sports team hopes
2. We all want
(What does it hope to do?)
(What do we all want to do?)
3. They advised the hearing-impaired child’s mother
did they advise her to do?)
4. The authorities permitted us to
permit us to do?)
5. A musician decided to
to do?)
(What
(What did the authorities
(What did the musician decide
II. From the text on Bismillah Khan, find the words and phrases that match these
definitions and write them down. The number of the paragraph where you will
find the words/phrases has been given for you in brackets.
1. the home of royal people (1)
2. the state of being alone (5)
3. a part which is absolutely necessary (2)
26 / Beehive
2019-204. to do something not done before (5)
5. without much effort (13)
6. quickly and in large quantities (9)
and
III. Tick the right answer.
1. When something is revived, it (remains dead/lives again).
2. When a government bans something, it wants it (stopped/started).
3. When something is considered auspicious, (welcome it/avoid it).
4. When we take to something, we find it (boring/interesting).
5. When you appreciate something, you (find it good and useful/find it of
no use).
6. When you replicate something, you do it (for the first time/for the second
time).
7. When we come to terms with something, it is (still upsetting/no longer
upsetting).
IV. Dictionary work
• The sound of the shehnai is auspicious.
• The auspicious sound of the shehnai is usually heard at marriages.
The adjective auspicious can occur after the verb be as in the first sentence,
or before a noun as in the second. But there are some adjectives which can be
used after the verb be and not before a noun. For example:
• Ustad Faiyaz Khan was overjoyed.
We cannot say: *the overjoyed man.
Look at these entries from the Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary (2005).
elder adi., nounawake adj., verb
adjective 1 [only before noun]
(of people, especially two
members of the same family)
older: my elder brother • his
elder sister 2 (the elder) used
without a noun immediately after
it to show who is the older of two
people: the elder of their two
sons 3 (the elder) (formal) used
before or after sb’s name to show
that they are the older of two
people who have the same name:
the elder Pitt • Pitt, the elder.adjective [not before noun] not
asleep (especially immediately
before or after sleeping): to be
half/fully awake; to be wide
awake. I was still awake when
he came to bed.
The Sound of Music / 27
2019-20Consult your dictionary and complete the following table. The first one has been
done for you.
adjective
only before noun
not before noun
both before and
after the verb be
indispensable
✔
impressed
afraid
outdoor
paternal
countless
priceless
Use these words in phrases or sentences of your own.
Speaking
I. Imagine the famous singer Kishori Amonkar is going to visit your school. You
have been asked to introduce her to the audience before her performance. How
would you introduce her?
Here is some information about Kishori Amonkar you can find on the Internet.
Read the passage and make notes of the main points about:
•
•
•
•
•
her parentage
the school of music she belongs to
her achievements
her inspiration
awards
Padma Bhushan Kishori Amonkar, widely considered the finest female
vocalist of her generation, was born in 1931, daughter of another great artist,
Smt. Mogubai Kurdikar. In her early years she absorbed the approach and
repertoire of her distinguished mother’s teacher Ustad Alladiya Khan. As her
own style developed, however, she moved away from Alladiya Khan’s ‘Jaipur-
Atrauli gharana’ style in some respects, and as a mature artist her approach
is usually regarded as an individual, if not unique, variant of the Jaipur
model.
Kishori Amonkar is a thinker, besotted by what she calls the mysterious
world of her raagas. She dissects them with the precision of a perfectionist,
almost like a scientist, until the most subtle of shades and emotions emerge
and re-emerge.
She is very much inspired by the teachings of the ancient Vedic sages,
written at a time when vocal music was highly devotional in character. This
28 / Beehive
2019-20soul searching quality of her music, coupled with a very intellectual approach
to raaga performance has gained her quite a following in India and has helped
to revive the study of khayal.
Significant awards bestowed on this artist include the Sangeet Natak
Akademi Award (1985), the Padma Bhushan (1987), and the highly coveted
Sangeet Samradhini Award (considered one of the most prestigious awards
in Indian Classical Music) in 1997.
II. Use your notes on Kishori Amonkar to introduce her to an imaginary audience.
You may use one of the following phrases to introduce a guest:
I am honoured to introduce.../I feel privileged to introduce.../We welcome you...
Writing
“If you work hard and know where you’re going, you’ll get there,” says Evelyn
Glennie.
You have now read about two musicians, Evelyn Glennie and Ustad Bismillah
Khan. Do you think that they both worked hard? Where did they want to ‘go’ ?
Answer these questions in two paragraphs, one on each of the two musicians.
Whenever you see darkness, there is extraordinary
opportunity for the light to burn brighter.
BONO
The Sound of Music / 29
2019-20W ind
The wind blows strongly and causes a lot of destruction.
How can we make friends with it?
Wind, come softly.
Don’t break the shutters of the windows.
Don’t scatter the papers.
Don’t throw down the books on the shelf.
There, look what you did — you threw them all down.
You tore the pages of the books.
You brought rain again.
You’re very clever at poking fun at weaklings.
Frail crumbling houses, crumbling doors, crumbling rafters,
crumbling wood, crumbling bodies, crumbling lives,
crumbling hearts —
the wind god winnows and crushes them all.
He won’t do what you tell him.
So, come, let’s build strong homes,
Let’s joint the doors firmly.
Practise to firm the body.
Make the heart steadfast.
Do this, and the wind will be friends with us.
The wind blows out weak fires.
He makes strong fires roar and flourish.
His friendship is good.
We praise him every day.
SUBRAMANIA BHARATI
[translated from the Tamil by
A.K. Ramanujan]
Subramania Bharati (1882 –1921) is a great Tamil poet, famous
for his patriotism in the pre-Independence era.
A.K. Ramanujan is a Kannada and English poet, well known for
his translation of classical and modern poetry.
2019-20GLOSSARY
poking fun: making fun of
rafters: sloping beams supporting a roof
winnow: blow grain free of chaff; separate grain from husk by blowing on it
Thinking about the Poem
I. 1. What are the things the wind does in the first stanza?
2. Have you seen anybody winnow grain
at home or in a paddy field? What is the
word in your language for winnowing?
What do people use for winnowing?
(Give the words in your language,
if you know them.)
3. What does the poet say the wind god winnows?
4. What should we do to make friends with the wind?
5. What do the last four lines of the poem mean to you?
6. How does the poet speak to the wind — in anger or with humour? You must
also have seen or heard of the wind “crumbling lives”. What is your response
to this? Is it like the poet’s?
II. The poem you have just read is originally in the Tamil. Do you know any such
poems in your language?
The tree on the mountain takes whatever the
weather brings. If it has any choice at all, it is in
putting down roots as deeply as possible.
CORRIE TEN BOOM
Wind / 31
2019-203. The Little Girl
BEFORE YOU READ
•Do you feel you know your parents better now, than when
you were much younger? Perhaps you now understand the
reasons for some of their actions that used to upset you earlier.
•This story about a little girl whose feelings for her father
change from fear to understanding will probably find an echo
in every home.
1. TO the little girl he was a figure to be feared and a figure to be feared:
avoided. Every morning before going to work he came
into her room and gave her a casual kiss, to which
she responded with “Goodbye, Father”. And oh,
there was a glad sense of relief when she heard the
noise of the carriage growing fainter and fainter
down the long road!
In the evening when he came home she stood
near the staircase and heard his loud voice in the
hall. “Bring my tea into the drawing-room... Hasn’t
the paper come yet? Mother, go and see if my paper’s
out there — and bring me my slippers.”
2. “Kezia,” Mother would call to her, “if you’re a good
girl you can come down and take off father’s boots.”
Slowly the girl would slip down the stairs, more
slowly still across the hall, and push open the
drawing-room door.
By that time he had his spectacles on and looked
at her over them in a way that was terrifying to
the little girl.
“Well, Kezia, hurry up and pull off these boots
and take them outside. Have you been a good
girl today?”
“I d-d-don’t know, Father.”
2019-20
a person to be feared
slip down: come
down quietly and
unwillingly“You d-d-don’t know? If you stutter like that
Mother will have to take you to the doctor.”
3. She never stuttered with other people — had quite
given it up — but only with Father, because then
she was trying so hard to say the words properly.
“What’s the matter? What are you looking so
wretched about? Mother, I wish you taught this child
not to appear on the brink of suicide... Here, Kezia,
carry my teacup back to the table carefully.”
He was so big — his hands and his neck,
especially his mouth when he yawned. Thinking
about him alone was like thinking about a giant.
4. On Sunday afternoons Grandmother sent her down
to the drawing-room to have a “nice talk with Father
and Mother”. But the little girl always found Mother
reading and Father stretched out on the sofa, his
handkerchief on his face, his feet on one of the best
cushions, sleeping soundly and snoring.
given it up: stopped
doing it
wretched: unhappy
on the brink of
suicide: about to
commit suicide
The little girl always found Mother reading and
Father stretched out on the sofa.
The Little Girl / 33
2019-20She sat on a stool, gravely watched him until he
woke and stretched, and asked the time — then
looked at her.
“Don’t stare so, Kezia. You look like a little
brown owl.”
One day, when she was kept indoors with a cold,
her grandmother told her that father’s birthday was
next week, and suggested she should make him a
pin-cushion for a gift out of a beautiful piece of
yellow silk.
5. Laboriously, with a double cotton, the little girl
stitched three sides. But what to fill it with? That
was the question. The grandmother was out in the
garden, and she wandered into Mother’s bedroom
to look for scraps. On the bed-table she discovered
a great many sheets of fine paper, gathered them
up, tore them into tiny pieces, and stuffed her case,
then sewed up the fourth side.
That night there was a hue and cry in the house.
Father’s great speech for the Port Authority had
been lost. Rooms were searched; servants
questioned. Finally Mother came into Kezia’s room.
“Kezia, I suppose you didn’t see some papers on
a table in our room?”
“Oh yes,” she said, “I tore them up for my
surprise.”
“What!” screamed Mother. “Come straight down
to the dining-room this instant.”
6. And she was dragged down to where Father was
pacing to and fro, hands behind his back.
“Well?” he said sharply.
Mother explained.
He stopped and stared at the child.
“Did you do that?”
“N-n-no”, she whispered.
“Mother, go up to her room and fetch down the
damned thing — see that the child’s put to bed
this instant.”
34 / Beehive
2019-20
laboriously: with a lot
of effort or difficulty
wandered into: went
into, by chance
scraps: small pieces
of cloth or paper,
etc. that are not
needed
hue and cry: angry
protest7. Crying too much to explain, she lay in the shadowed
room watching the evening light make a sad little
pattern on the floor.
Then Father came into the room with a ruler in
his hands.
“I am going to beat you for this,” he said.
“Oh, no, no”, she screamed, hiding under the
bedclothes.
He pulled them aside.
“Sit up,” he ordered, “and hold out your hands.
You must be taught once and for all not to touch
what does not belong to you.”
“But it was for your b-b-birthday.”
Down came the ruler on her little, pink palms.
8. Hours later, when Grandmother had wrapped her
in a shawl and rocked her in the rocking-chair, the
child clung to her soft body.
“What did God make fathers for?” she sobbed.
“Here’s a clean hanky, darling. Blow your nose.
Go to sleep, pet; you’ll forget all about it in the
morning. I tried to explain to Father but he was too
upset to listen tonight.”
But the child never forgot. Next time she saw
him she quickly put both hands behind her back
and a red colour flew into her cheeks.
9. The Macdonalds lived next door. They had five
children. Looking through a gap in the fence the
little girl saw them playing ‘tag’ in the evening.
The father with the baby, Mao, on his shoulders,
two little girls hanging on to his coat pockets
ran round and round the flower -beds, shaking
with laughter. Once she saw the boys turn the
hose on him—and he tried to catch them laughing
all the time.
Then it was she decided there were different
sorts of fathers.
Suddenly, one day, Mother became ill, and she
and Grandmother went to hospital.
The little girl was left alone in the house with
Alice, the cook. That was all right in the daytime,
tag: a children’s
game of catching one
another
The Little Girl / 35
2019-20The little girl saw through a gap the Macdonalds
playing ‘tag’ in the evening.
but while Alice was putting her to bed she grew
suddenly afraid.
10. “What’ll I do if I have a nightmare?” she asked. “I
often have nightmares and then Grannie takes me
into her bed—I can’t stay in the dark—it all gets
‘whispery’…”
“You just go to sleep, child,” said Alice, pulling
off her socks, “and don’t you scream and wake your
poor Pa.”
36 / Beehive
2019-20
nightmare: a bad
dreamBut the same old nightmare came — the butcher
with a knife and a rope, who came nearer and
nearer, smiling that dreadful smile, while she could
not move, could only stand still, crying out,
“Grandma! Grandma!” She woke shivering to see
Father beside her bed, a candle in his hand.
“What’s the matter?” he said.
11. “Oh, a butcher — a knife — I want Grannie.” He
blew out the candle, bent down and caught up the
child in his arms, carrying her along the passage
to the big bedroom. A newspaper was on the bed.
He put away the paper, then carefully tucked up
the child. He lay down beside her. Half asleep still,
still with the butcher’s smile all about her it seemed,
she crept close to him, snuggled her head under
his arm, held tightly to his shirt.
Then the dark did not matter; she lay still.
“Here, rub your feet against my legs and get
them warm,” said Father.
12. Tired out, he slept before the little girl. A funny feeling
came over her. Poor Father, not so big, after all —
and with no one to look after him. He was harder
than Grandmother, but it was a nice hardness. And
every day he had to work and was too tired to be a
Mr Macdonald… She had torn up all his beautiful
writing… She stirred suddenly, and sighed.
“What’s the matter?” asked her father. “Another
dream?”
“Oh,” said the little girl, “my head’s on your heart.
I can hear it going. What a big heart you’ve got,
Father dear.”
tucked up: covered
up nicely in bed
snuggled: moved into
a warm, comfortable
position, close to
another person
KATHERINE MANSFIELD
The Little Girl / 37
2019-20Thinking about the T
Teext
I. Given below are some emotions that Kezia felt. Match the emotions in Column A
with the items in Column B.
A
B
1. fear or terror
2. glad sense of relief
3. a “funny” feeling, perhaps
of understanding
(i) father comes into her room to give
her a goodbye kiss
(ii) noise of the carriage grows fainter
(iii) father comes home
(iv) speaking to father
(v) going to bed when alone at home
(vi) father comforts her and falls asleep
(vii) father stretched out on the sofa,
snoring
II. Answer the following questions in one or two sentences.
1. Why was Kezia afraid of her father?
2. Who were the people in Kezia’s family?
3. What was Kezia’s father’s routine
(i) before going to his office?
(ii) after coming back from his office?
(iii) on Sundays?
4. In what ways did Kezia’s grandmother encourage her to get to know her
father better?
III. Discuss these questions in class with your teacher and then write down your
answers in two or three paragraphs each.
1. Kezia’s efforts to please her father resulted in displeasing him very much.
How did this happen?
2. Kezia decides that there are “different kinds of fathers”. What kind of father
was Mr Macdonald, and how was he different from Kezia’s father?
3. How does Kezia begin to see her father as a human being who needs her
sympathy?
Thinking about Language
I. Look at the following sentence.
There was a glad sense of relief when she heard the noise of the carriage growing
fainter...
Here, glad means happy about something.
Glad, happy, pleased, delighted, thrilled and overjoyed are synonyms (words or
38 / Beehive
2019-20expressions that have the same or nearly the same meaning.) However, they
express happiness in certain ways.
Read the sentences below.
• She was glad when the meeting was over.
• The chief guest was pleased to announce the name of the winner.
1. Use an appropriate word from the synonyms given above in the following
sentences. Clues are given in brackets.
(i) She was
(ii) I was
excited about)
by the news of her brother’s wedding. (very pleased)
to be invited to the party. (extremely pleased and
(iii) She was
at the birth of her granddaughter. (extremely happy)
(iv) The coach was
(v) She was very
that has happened)
with his performance. (satisfied about)
with her results. (happy about something
2. Study the use of the word big in the following sentence.
He was so big — his hands and his neck, especially his mouth…
Here, big means large in size.
Now, consult a dictionary and find out the meaning of big in the following
sentences. The first one has been done for you.
(i) You are a big girl now.
older
(ii) Today you are going to take the biggest decision of your career.
(iii) Their project is full of big ideas.
(iv) Cricket is a big game in our country.
(v) I am a big fan of Lata Mangeskar.
(vi) You have to cook a bit more as my friend is a big eater.
(vii) What a big heart you’ve got, Father dear.
II. Verbs of Reporting
Study the following sentences.
• “What!” screamed Mother.
• “N-n-no”, she whispered.
• “Sit up,” he ordered.
The italicised words are verbs of reporting. We quote or report what someone
has said or thought by using a reporting verb. Every reporting clause contains
a reporting verb. For example:
• He promised to help in my project.
• “How are you doing?” Seema asked.
The Little Girl / 39
2019-20We use verbs of reporting to advise, order, report statements, thoughts,
intentions, questions, requests, apologies, manner of speaking and so on.
1. Underline the verbs of reporting in the following sentences.
(i) He says he will enjoy the ride.
(ii) Father mentioned that he was going on a holiday.
(iii) No one told us that the shop was closed.
(iv) He answered that the price would go up.
(v) I wondered why he was screaming.
(vi) Ben told her to wake him up.
(vii) Ratan apologised for coming late to the party.
2. Some verbs of reporting are given in the box. Choose the appropriate verbs
and fill in the blanks in the following sentences.
were complaining
shouted
replied
remarked
ordered
suggested
(i) “I am not afraid,”
the woman.
(ii) “Leave me alone,” my mother
(iii) The children
.
that the roads were crowded and noisy.
(iv) “Perhaps he isn’t a bad sort of a chap after all,”
(v) “Let’s go and look at the school ground,”
(vi) The traffic police
the master.
the sports teacher.
all the passers-by to keep off the road.
Speaking
Form pairs or groups and discuss the following questions.
1. This story is not an Indian story. But do you think there are fathers, mothers
and grandmothers like the ones portrayed in the story in our own country?
2. Was Kezia’s father right to punish her? What kind of a person was he?
You might find some of these words useful in describing him:
undemonstrative
loving
strict
hard-working
responsible
unkind
disciplinarian
short-tempered
affectionate
caring
indifferent
Writing
Has your life been different from or similar to that of Kezia when you were a
child? Has your perception about your parents changed now? Do you find any
change in your parents’ behaviour vis-à-vis yours? Who has become more
understanding? What steps would you like to take to build a relationship based
on understanding? Write three or four paragraphs (150–200 words) discussing
these issues from your own experience.
40 / Beehive
2019-20R ain on the Roof
When the sky is covered with dark clouds and it starts raining,
have you ever listened to the patter of soft rain on the roof ?
What thoughts flashed through your mind as you heard this
melody of nature? Read the poem to find out what the poet
dreamed of while listening to the rain.
When the humid shadows hover
Over all the starry spheres
And the melancholy darkness
Gently weeps in rainy tears,
What a bliss to press the pillow
Of a cottage-chamber bed
And lie listening to the patter
Of the soft rain overhead!
Every tinkle on the shingles
Has an echo in the heart;
And a thousand dreamy fancies
Into busy being start,
And a thousand recollections
Weave their air-threads into woof,
As I listen to the patter
Of the rain upon the roof.
Now in memory comes my mother,
As she used in years agone,
To regard the darling dreamers
Ere she left them till the dawn:
O! I feel her fond look on me
As I list to this refrain
Which is played upon the shingles
By the patter of the rain.
COATES KINNEY
2019-20GLOSSARY
tinkle: short, light ringing sounds
shingles: rectangular wooden tiles used on roofs
woof: weft, i.e. the threads woven across the loom
ere: old poetic word for ‘before’
refrain: a repeated part of a song or a poem; here, the sound of the rain
list: old poetic word for ‘listen’
Thinking about the Poem
I. 1. What do the following phrases mean to you? Discuss in class.
(i) humid shadows
(ii) starry spheres
(iii) what a bliss
(iv) a thousand dreamy fancies into busy being start
(v) a thousand recollections weave their air-threads into woof
2. What does the poet like to do when it rains?
3. What is the single major memory that comes to the poet? Who are the “darling
dreamers” he refers to?
4. Is the poet now a child? Is his mother still alive?
II. 1. When you were a young child, did your mother tuck you in, as the poet’s
did?
2. Do you like rain? What do you do when it rains steadily or heavily as
described in the poem?
3. Does everybody have a cosy bed to lie in when it rains? Look around you and
describe how different kinds of people or animals spend time, seek shelter
etc. during rain.
All that I am or ever hope it be, I owe to my
angel Mother.
ABRAHAM LINCOLN
42 / Beehive
2019-20eacher
Notes for the T
Teacher
Units 4 –7
4. A TRULY BEAUTIFUL MIND
The story of Einstein tries to show him as a human being, a fairly
ordinary person who had his likes and dislikes, his streaks of rebellion,
and his problems. The class can think about how a ‘great person’ was
perceived before being recognised as ‘great’: it is not as though great
people are born with a special sign that allows us to recognise them
instantly! What qualities in a person, then, make them a genius or a
great person?
You can take the help of a science teacher to explain Einstein’s Theory
of Relativity, to talk about Einstein, and build inter-subject cooperation.
The exercise of matching headings to paragraphs in the lesson is useful
for finding the topic sentence or to scan a paragraph for specific
information. Students may be asked to provide a different heading if
they feel some other point is equally important.
Students should be guided to write a newspaper report. Note the points
given below. Illustrate them by bringing examples from newspapers into
the class, and ask students to bring their own examples.
• A report should have:
1. A headline
2. Name of the reporter e.g. ‘By a Staff Reporter’, etc.
3. Place, date, source (the source may also be given at the end of the
report).
• The beginning is usually an expansion of the headline.
The middle
paragraph gives the details. It is followed by the conclusion or the
summing up.
• The report should be brief, but the headline and the style should be
eye-catching.
• Sometimes important points are given in a box in the centre of the
report.
• Regarding the language of the reports:
1. passives for past action (for example: It is found .. ., .. . has been
unearthed.)
2019-202. present tense for statements (The document contains…, The
manuscript describes…)
This unit has a passage for dictation, an anecdote. Dictation is an
exercise that requires the individual participation of each student. It
fosters unconscious thinking, and draws attention to language form.
Students can also be given opportunities for self or peer correction after
the dictation.
• Students should first read the passage silently, noticing the use of
punctuation marks.
• The passage to be dictated should be read aloud twice in the class
with proper intonation, and pauses between meaningful phrases.
• The passage is read a third time for students to check through.
5. THE SNAKE AND THE MIRROR
‘The Snake and the Mirror’ is a complex story of self-discovery that is
humorously told. The narrator is a vain and foolish young man who in
a moment of crisis realises that he is “poor, foolish and stupid”. The
questions are designed to help the students notice the humour in the
narration.
This unit has a formal, expository passage for dictation. Students should
be encouraged to learn the spellings of unfamiliar words beforehand.
The dictation of such passages also encourages the development of
grammar in the students’ minds, as they recall complex language.
The Writing task is based on a sketch from a photograph that tells a
story. Encourage the students to read the words given alongside the
sketch. Let the students form pairs or groups to talk freely about the
sketch before they start writing.
A new kind of activity introduced in this lesson is to compare two
translations of the beginning of a story. This activity suggests to the
students that language is not ‘fixed’; there are different ways of
experiencing an idea, which also lead to small changes in the idea that
is expressed. This activity should be done as a fun activity.
6. MY CHILDHOOD
The autobiographical account of childhood embodies the themes of
harmony and prejudice, tradition and change. The questions guide the
children to identify the instances of the themes.
A map reading activity is given in this unit. Students will find out the
geographical location of Dhanushkodi and Rameswaram, and
the languages spoken at that time by different communities. This
44 / Beehive
2019-20will develop a critical understanding of how life and society in
the deep south changed and developed over the years. Dhanuskodi
and Rameswaram are on an island, the Pamban Island, off the
Tamil Nadu coast.
The dictionary work encourages children to identify the contexts, literal
and metaphorical, in which the given words occur. You may find other
such words to add to the exercise.
The dictation exercise in this unit requires the rearrangement of jumbled
paragraphs. Ideally this kind of dictation should be carried out with
passages that the students have not seen before.
The teacher dictates the three parts of the given passage, in random
order, one to each group in class, for example part two first, then part
three, and finally part one. The class has to share information in order
to put the text together in the right order. This can be a class activity
directed by the teacher.
The Speaking exercise includes an activity requiring students to ask
other people for their opinion on the topic.
7. PACKING
This is a humorous story about the confusion and mess made by
inexperienced packing. Draw the attention of the students to the antics
of Montmorency, the dog. Help students to find humorous elements in
the story such as Jerome finding his toothbrush inside the shoe and
Harris squashing the tomatoes. Draw their attention to humour in the
narration, such as “Montmorency’s ambition in life is to get in the way
and be sworn at,” or the beginning of the narration “Packing is one of
those many things that I feel I know more about than any other person
living.(It surprises me myself, sometimes, how many such things there
are.)”
An activity in this unit is to collect examples of instructions and
directions such as those given in pamphlets for different products. An
example has been provided of a pamphlet with instructions in different
foreign languages. The purpose is to encourage students to find other
such pamphlets as a fun activity.
Notes for the Teacher / 45
2019-204. A T
ruly Beautiful Mind
Truly
BEFORE YOU READ
•Who do you think of, when you hear the word ‘genius’? Who
is a genius — what qualities do you think a genius has?
•We shall now read about a young German civil servant who
took the world by storm about a hundred years ago. In the
summer of 1905, the 26-year-old published in quick succession
four ground-breaking papers: about light, the motion of
particles, the electrodynamics of moving bodies, and energy.
His work took up only a few pages in scientific journals, but
changed forever our understanding of space, time and the
entire cosmos — and transformed the name ‘Einstein’ into a
synonym for genius.
•Fifty years after his death, Albert Einstein’s genius still reigns.
1. ALBERT Einstein was born on 14 March 1879 in the
German city of Ulm, without any indication that he
was destined for greatness. On the contrary, his
mother thought Albert was a freak. To her, his head
seemed much too large.
2. At the age of two-and-a-half, Einstein still wasn’t
talking. When he finally did learn to speak, he uttered
everything twice. Einstein did not know what to do
with other children, and his playmates called him
“Brother Boring.” So the youngster played by himself
Otto Neugebauer, the historian of ancient mathematics, told a
story about the boy Einstein that he characterises as a “legend”,
but that seems fairly authentic. As he was a late talker, his parents
were worried. At last, at the supper table one night, he broke his
silence to say, “The soup is too hot.” Greatly relieved, his parents
asked why he had never said a word before. Albert replied,
“Because up to now everything was in order.”
2019-20
freak: a word used
disapprovingly to talk
about a person who is
unusual and doesn’t
behave, look or think
like others3.
4.
5.
6.
much of the time. He especially loved mechanical
toys. Looking at his newborn sister, Maja, he is said
to have said: “Fine, but where are her wheels?”
A headmaster once told his father that what
Einstein chose as a profession wouldn’t matter,
because “he’ll never make a success at anything.”
Einstein began learning to play the violin at the
age of six, because his mother wanted him to; he
later became a gifted amateur violinist, maintaining
this skill throughout his life.
But Albert Einstein was not a bad pupil. He went
to high school in Munich, where Einstein’s family
had moved when he was 15 months old, and scored
good marks in almost every subject. Einstein hated
the school’s regimentation, and often clashed with
his teachers. At the age of 15, Einstein felt so stifled
there that he left the school for good.
The previous year, Albert’s parents had moved to
Milan, and left their son with relatives. After prolonged
discussion, Einstein got his wish to continue his
education in German-speaking Switzerland, in a city
which was more liberal than Munich.
Einstein was highly gifted in mathematics and
interested in physics, and after finishing school,
he decided to study at a university in Zurich. But
science wasn’t the only thing that appealed to the
dashing young man with the walrus moustache.
Einstein in 1900 at the
age of 21.
amateur: doing
something for
personal enjoyment
rather than as a
profession
regimentation: order
or discipline taken to
an extreme
stifled: unable to
breathe; suffocated
liberal: willing to
understand and
respect others’
opinions
Einstein in 1955 as we
remember him now
A Truly Beautiful Mind / 47
2019-207. He also felt a special interest in a fellow student,
Mileva Maric, whom he found to be a “clever
creature.” This young Serb had come to Switzerland
because the University in Zurich was one of the few
in Europe where women could get degrees. Einstein
saw in her an ally against the “philistines”—
those people in his family and at the university
with whom he was constantly at odds. The couple
fell in love. Letters survive in which they put their
affection into words, mixing science with
tenderness. Wrote Einstein: “How happy and proud
I shall be when we both have brought our work on
relativity to a victorious conclusion.”
8. In 1900, at the age of 21, Albert Einstein was a
university graduate and unemployed. He worked
as a teaching assistant, gave private lessons and
finally secured a job in 1902 as a technical expert
in the patent office in Bern. While he was supposed
to be assessing other people’s inventions, Einstein
was actually developing his own ideas in secret. He
is said to have jokingly called his desk drawer at
work the “bureau of theoretical physics.”
9. One of the famous papers of 1905 was Einstein’s
Special Theory of Relativity, according to which time
and distance are not absolute. Indeed, two perfectly
accurate clocks will not continue to show the same
time if they come together again after a journey if
one of them has been moving very fast relative to
the other. From this followed the world’s most
famous formula which describes the relationship
between mass and energy:
E = mc2
(In this mathematical equation, E stands for energy, m for mass
and c for the speed of the light in a vacuum (about 300,000 km/s).
When you sit with a nice girl for two hours, it
seems like two minutes. When you sit on a
hot stove for two minutes, it seems like two
hours —that’s relativity. – ALBERT EINSTEIN
***
48 / Beehive
2019-20
ally: a friend or an
associate
philistines: a word
used disapprovingly
to talk about people
who do not like art,
literature or music
patent: a document
which gives the
rights of an invention
to an inventor
absolute: measured
in itself, not in
relation to anything
else10. While Einstein was solving the most difficult
problems in physics, his private life was
unravelling. Albert had wanted to marry Mileva right
after finishing his studies, but his mother was
against it. She thought Mileva, who was three years
older than her son, was too old for him. She was
also bothered by Mileva’s intelligence. “She is a
book like you,” his mother said. Einstein put the
wedding off.
11. The pair finally married in January 1903, and had
two sons. But a few years later, the marriage
faltered. Mileva, meanwhile, was losing her
intellectual ambition and becoming an unhappy
housewife. After years of constant fighting, the
couple finally divorced in 1919. Einstein married
his cousin Elsa the same year.
unravelling: starting
to fail
faltered: became
weak
***
12.Einstein’s new personal chapter coincided with his
rise to world fame. In 1915, he had published his
General Theory of Relativity, which provided a new
interpretation of gravity. An eclipse of the sun in
1919 brought proof that it was accurate. Einstein
had correctly calculated in advance the extent to
which the light from fixed stars would be deflected
through the sun’s gravitational field. The newspapers
proclaimed his work as “a scientific revolution.”
13. Einstein received the Nobel Prize for Physics in
1921. He was showered with honours and invitations
from all over the world, and lauded by the press.
deflected: changed
direction because it
hit something
***
14. When the Nazis came to power in Germany in 1933,
Einstein emigrated to the United States. Five years
later, the discovery of nuclear fission in Berlin had
American physicists in an uproar. Many of them
had fled from Fascism, just as Einstein had, and
now they were afraid the Nazis could build and use
an atomic bomb.
in an uproar: very
upset
A Truly Beautiful Mind / 49
2019-2015. At the urging of a colleague, Einstein wrote a letter
to the American President, Franklin D. Roosevelt,
on 2 August 1939, in which he warned: “A single
bomb of this type . . . exploded in a port, might very
well destroy the whole port together with some of
the surrounding territory.” His words did not fail to
have an effect. The Americans developed the atomic
bomb in a secret project of their own, and dropped
it on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki
in August 1945.
16. Einstein was deeply shaken by the extent of the
destruction. This time he wrote a public missive to
the United Nations. In it he proposed the formation
of a world government. Unlike the letter to Roosevelt,
this one made no impact. But over the next decade,
Einstein got ever more involved in politics —
agitating for an end to the arms buildup and using
his popularity to campaign for peace and democracy.
17. When Einstein died in 1955 at the age of 76, he
was celebrated as a visionary and world citizen as
much as a scientific genius.
missive: letter,
especially long and
official
visionary: a person
who can think about
the future in an
original and
intelligent way
Thinking about the T
Teext
1. Here are some headings for paragraphs in the text. Write the number(s) of the
paragraph(s) for each title against the heading. The first one is done for you.
9
(i) Einstein’s equation
(ii) Einstein meets his future wife
(iii) The making of a violinist
(iv) Mileva and Einstein’s mother
(v) A letter that launched the arms race
(vi) A desk drawer full of ideas
(vii) Marriage and divorce
50 / Beehive
2019-202. Who had these opinions about Einstein?
(i) He was boring.
(ii) He was stupid and would never succeed in life.
(iii) He was a freak.
3. Explain what the reasons for the following are.
(i) Einstein leaving the school in Munich for good.
(ii) Einstein wanting to study in Switzerland rather than in Munich.
(iii) Einstein seeing in Mileva an ally.
(iv) What do these tell you about Einstein?
4. What did Einstein call his desk drawer at the patent office? Why?
5. Why did Einstein write a letter to Franklin Roosevelt?
6. How did Einstein react to the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki?
7. Why does the world remember Einstein as a “world citizen”?
8. Here are some facts from Einstein’s life. Arrange them in chronological order.
[ ] Einstein publishes his special theory of relativity.
[ ] He is awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics.
[ ] Einstein writes a letter to U.S. President, Franklin D. Roosevelt, and
warns against Germany’s building of an atomic bomb.
[ ] Einstein attends a high school in Munich.
[ ] Einstein’s family moves to Milan.
[ ] Einstein is born in the German city of Ulm.
[ ] Einstein joins a university in Zurich, where he meets Mileva.
[ ] Einstein dies.
[ ] He provides a new interpretation of gravity.
[ ] Tired of the school’s regimentation, Einstein withdraws from school.
[ ] He works in a patent office as a technical expert.
[ ] When Hitler comes to power, Einstein leaves Germany for the United
States.
Thinking about Language
I. Here are some sentences from the story. Choose the word from the brackets
which can be substituted for the italicised words in the sentences.
1. A few years later, the marriage faltered. (failed, broke, became weak).
2. Einstein was constantly at odds with people at the university. (on bad terms,
in disagreement, unhappy)
3. The newspapers proclaimed his work as “a scientific revolution.” (declared,
praised, showed)
A Truly Beautiful Mind / 51
2019-204. Einstein got ever more involved in politics, agitating for an end to the arms
buildup. (campaigning, fighting, supporting)
5. At the age of 15, Einstein felt so stifled that he left the school for good.
(permanently, for his benefit, for a short time)
6. Five years later, the discovery of nuclear fission in Berlin had American
physicists in an uproar. (in a state of commotion, full of criticism, in a
desperate state)
7. Science wasn’t the only thing that appealed to the dashing young man with
the walrus moustache. (interested, challenged, worried)
II. Study the following sentences.
• Einstein became a gifted amateur violinist, maintaining this skill throughout
his life.
• Letters survive in which they put their affection into words, mixing science
with tenderness.
The parts in italics in the above sentences begin with –ing verbs, and are called
participial phrases. Participial phrases say something more about the person
or thing talked about or the idea expressed by the sentence as a whole. For
example:
– Einstein became a gifted amateur violinist. He maintained this skill
throughout his life.
Complete the sentences below by filling in the blanks with suitable participial
clauses. The information that has to be used in the phrases is provided as a
sentence in brackets.
1.
, the firefighters finally put out the fire.
(They worked
round the clock.)
2. She watched the sunset above the mountain,
the colours blending softly into one another.)(She noticed
3. The excited horse pawed the ground rapidly,
neighed continually.)(While it
4.
, I found myself in Bangalore, instead of Benaras. (I had
taken the wrong train.)
, I was desperate to get to the bathroom. (I had not bathed
5.
for two days)
6. The stone steps,
down).
needed to be replaced. (They were worn
7. The actor received hundreds of letters from his fans,
(They asked him to send them his photograph.)
52 / Beehive
2019-20Writing Newspaper Reports
Here are some notes which you could use to write a report.
21 August 2005 — original handwritten manuscript of Albert Einstein
unearthed — by student Rowdy Boeynik in the University of the
Netherlands — Boeynik researching papers — papers belonging to an
old friend of Einstein — fingerprints of Einstein on these papers —
16-page document dated 1924 — Einstein’s work on this last theory —
behaviour of atoms at low temperature — now known as the Bose-Einstein
condensation — the manuscript to be kept at Leyden University where
Einstein got the Nobel Prize.
Write a report which has four paragraphs, one each on:
• What was unearthed.
• Who unearthed it and when.
• What the document contained.
• Where it will be kept.
Your report could begin like this:
Student Unearths Einstein Manuscript
21 AUGUST 2005. An original handwritten Albert Einstein manuscript
has been unearthed at a university in the Netherlands ...
Dictation
Your teacher will dictate these paragraphs to you. Write down the paragraphs
with correct punctuation marks.
In 1931 Charlie Chaplin invited Albert Einstein, who was visiting Hollywood,
to a private screening of his new film, City Lights. As the two men drove into
town together, passersby waved and cheered. Chaplin turned to his guest and
explained: “The people are applauding you because none of them understands
you and applauding me because everybody understands me.”
One of Einstein’s colleagues asked him for his telephone number one
day. Einstein reached for a telephone directory and looked it up. “You don’t
remember your own number?” the man asked, startled.
“No,” Einstein answered. “Why should I memorise something I can so
easily get from a book?” (In fact, Einstein claimed never to memorise anything
which could be looked up in less than two minutes.)
A Truly Beautiful Mind / 53
2019-20ak
The LLak
akee Isle of Innisfree
This well known poem explores the poet’s longing for the peace
and tranquillity of Innisfree, a place where he spent a lot of
time as a boy. This poem is a lyric.
I will arise and go now, and go to Innisfree,
And a small cabin build there, of clay and wattles made:
Nine bean-rows will I have there, a hive for the honeybee,
And live alone in the bee-loud glade.
And I shall have some peace there, for peace comes dropping slow
Dropping from the veils of the morning to where the cricket sings;
There midnight’s all a glimmer, and noon a purple glow,
And evenings full of the linnet’s wings.
I will arise and go now, for always night and day
I hear the lake water lapping with low sounds by the shore;
While I stand on the roadway, or on the pavements grey,
I hear it in the deep heart’s core.
WILLIAM BUTLER YEATS
GLOSSARY
wattles: twisted sticks for making fences, walls
glade: clearing; open space
linnet: a small brown and grey bird with a short beak
Thinking about the Poem
I. 1. What kind of place is Innisfree? Think about:
(i) the three things the poet wants to do when he goes back there (stanza I);
(ii) what he hears and sees there and its effect on him (stanza II);
(iii) what he hears in his “heart’s core” even when he is far away from
Innisfree (stanza III).
2019-202. By now you may have concluded that Innisfree is a simple, natural place,
full of beauty and peace. How does the poet contrast it with where he now
stands? (Read stanza III.)
3. Do you think Innisfree is only a place, or a state of mind? Does the poet
actually miss the place of his boyhood days?
II. 1. Look at the words the poet uses to describe what he sees and hears at
Innisfree
(i) bee-loud glade
(ii) evenings full of the linnet’s wings
(iii) lake water lapping with low sounds
What pictures do these words create in your mind?
2. Look at these words;
... peace comes dropping slow
Dropping from the veils of the morning to where the cricket sings
What do these words mean to you? What do you think “comes dropping
slow...from the veils of the morning”? What does “to where the cricket sings”
mean?
Health is the greatest gift, contentment
the greatest wealth, faithfulness the best
relationship.
GAUTAMA BUDDHA
The Lake Isle of Innisfree / 55
2019-205. The Snak
Snakee and the Mir
Mirrror
BEFORE YOU READ
•Do you like to look at yourself in the mirror? What do you
think about at such times? Have you ever seen a dog, a cat
or a bird look into a mirror? What do you think it sees?
•Now read this humorous story about a doctor, a snake, and
a mirror.
1. “H AS a snake ever coiled itself round any part of
your body? A full-blooded cobra?” All of us fell silent.
The question came from the homeopath. The topic
came up when we were discussing snakes. We
listened attentively as the doctor continued with
his tale.
It was a hot summer night; about ten o’clock. I had
my meal at the restaurant and returned to my room.
I heard a noise from above as I opened the door.
The sound was a familiar one. One could say that
the rats and I shared the room. I took out my box of
matches and lighted the kerosene lamp on the table.
2. The house was not electrified; it was a small rented
room. I had just set up medical practice and my
earnings were meagre. I had about sixty rupees in
my suitcase. Along with some shirts and dhotis, I
also possessed one solitary black coat which I was
then wearing.
3. I took off my black coat, white shirt and not-so-
white vest and hung them up. I opened the two
windows in the room. It was an outer room with
one wall facing the open yard. It had a tiled roof
with long supporting gables that rested on the beam
over the wall. There was no ceiling. There was a
56 / Beehive
2019-20
meagre: small in
quantity.
gable
gable: upper part of
a wall below a
sloping roofregular traffic of rats to and from the beam. I made
my bed and pulled it close to the wall. I lay down
but I could not sleep. I got up and went out to the
veranda for a little air, but the wind god seemed to
have taken time off.
4. I went back into the room and sat down on the
chair. I opened the box beneath the table and took
out a book, the Materia Medica. I opened it at the
table on which stood the lamp and a large mirror; a
small comb lay beside the mirror.
One feels tempted to look into a mirror when it is
near one. I took a look. In those days I was a great
admirer of beauty and I believed in making myself
look handsome. I was unmarried and I was a doctor.
I felt I had to make my presence felt. I picked up the
comb and ran it through my hair and adjusted the
parting so that it looked straight and neat.
Again I heard that sound from above.
5. I took a close look at my face in the mirror. I made
an important decision — I would shave daily and
grow a thin moustache to look more handsome. I
was after all a bachelor, and a doctor!
I looked into the mirror and smiled. It was an
attractive smile. I made another earth-shaking
decision. I would always keep that attractive smile
on my face . . . to look more handsome. I was after
all a bachelor, and a doctor too on top of it!
Again came that noise from above.
6. I got up, paced up and down the room. Then another
lovely thought struck me. I would marry.
I would get married to a woman doctor who had
plenty of money and a good medical practice. She
had to be fat; for a valid reason. If I made some silly
mistake and needed to run away she should not be
able to run after me and catch me!
With such thoughts in my mind I resumed my seat
in the chair in front of the table. There were no
more sounds from above. Suddenly there came a
dull thud as if a rubber tube had fallen to the
The Snake and the Mirror / 57
2019-20ground ... surely nothing to worry about. Even so I
thought I would turn around and take a look. No
sooner had I turned than a fat snake wriggled over
the back of the chair and landed on my shoulder.
The snake’s landing on me and my turning were
simultaneous.
7. I didn’t jump. I didn’t tremble. I didn’t cry out. There
was no time to do any such thing. The snake
slithered along my shoulder and coiled around my
left arm above the elbow. The hood was spread out
and its head was hardly three or four inches from
my face!
It would not be correct to say merely that I sat
there holding my breath. I was turned to stone. But
my mind was very active. The door opened into
darkness. The room was surrounded by darkness.
In the light of the lamp I sat there like a stone
image in the flesh.
8. I felt then the great presence of the creator of this
world and this universe. God was there. Suppose I
said something and he did not like it . . .
I tried in my imagination to write in bright letters
outside my little heart the words, ‘O God’.
There was some pain in my left arm. It was as if a
thick leaden rod — no, a rod made of molten fire —
was slowly but powerfully crushing my arm. The
arm was beginning to be drained of all strength.
What could I do?
9. At my slightest movement the snake would strike
me! Death lurked four inches away. Suppose it
struck, what was the medicine I had to take? There
were no medicines in the room. I was but a poor,
foolish and stupid doctor. I forgot my danger and
smiled feebly at myself.
It seemed as if God appreciated that. The snake
turned its head. It looked into the mirror and saw
its reflection. I do not claim that it was the first
snake that had ever looked into a mirror. But it
was certain that the snake was looking into the
mirror. Was it admiring its own beauty? Was it trying
58 / Beehive
2019-20Perhaps it wanted to enjoy its
reflection at closer quarters.
to make an important decision about growing a
moustache or using eye shadow and mascara or
wearing a vermilion spot on its forehead?
10. I did not know anything for certain. What sex was
this snake, was it male or female? I will never know;
for the snake unwound itself from my arm and slowly
slithered into my lap. From there it crept onto the
table and moved towards the mirror. Perhaps it
wanted to enjoy its reflection at closer quarters.
I was no mere image cut in granite. I was suddenly
a man of flesh and blood. Still holding my breath I
got up from the chair. I quietly went out through
the door into the veranda. From there I leapt into
the yard and ran for all I was worth.
“Phew !” Each of us heaved a sigh of relief. Somebody
asked, “Doctor, is your wife very fat?”
11. “No,” the doctor said. “God willed otherwise. My life
companion is a thin reedy person with the gift of a
sprinter.”
Someone else asked, “Doctor, when you ran did the
snake follow you?”
The Snake and the Mirror / 59
2019-20The doctor replied, “I ran and ran till I reached
a friend’s house. Immediately I smeared oil all over
myself and took a bath. I changed into fresh clothes.
The next morning at about eight-thirty I took my
friend and one or two others to my room to move
my things from there. But we found we had little to
carry. Some thief had removed most of my things.
The room had been cleaned out! But not really, the
thief had left behind one thing as a final insult!’
12. “What was that?” I asked.
The doctor said, “My vest, the dirty one. The
fellow had such a sense of cleanliness...! The rascal
could have taken it and used it after washing it
with soap and water.”
“Did you see the snake the next day, doctor?”
The doctor laughed, “I’ve never seen it since. It
was a snake which was taken with its own beauty!” taken with: attracted by
VAIKOM MUHAMMAD BASHEER
[ translated from the Malayalam
by V. Abdulla]
Thinking about the T
Teext
I. Discuss in pairs and answer each question below in a short paragraph
(30–40 words).
1. “The sound was a familiar one.” What sound did the doctor hear? What did
he think it was? How many times did he hear it? (Find the places in the
text.) When and why did the sounds stop?
2. What two “important” and “earth-shaking” decisions did the doctor take
while he was looking into the mirror?
3. “I looked into the mirror and smiled,” says the doctor. A little later he says,
“I forgot my danger and smiled feebly at myself.” What is the doctor’s opinion
about himself when: (i) he first smiles, and (ii) he smiles again? In what way
do his thoughts change in between, and why?
II. This story about a frightening incident is narrated in a humorous way. What
makes it humorous? (Think of the contrasts it presents between dreams and
reality. Some of them are listed below.)
1. (i) The kind of person the doctor is (money, possessions)
(ii) The kind of person he wants to be (appearance, ambition)
60 / Beehive
2019-202. (i) The person he wants to marry
(ii) The person he actually marries
3. (i) His thoughts when he looks into the mirror
(ii) His thoughts when the snake is coiled around his arm
Write short paragraphs on each of these to get your answer.
Thinking about Language
I. Here are some sentences from the text. Say which of them tell you, that the
author: (a) was afraid of the snake, (b) was proud of his appearance,
(c) had a sense of humour, (d) was no longer afraid of the snake.
1. I was turned to stone.
2. I was no mere image cut in granite.
3. The arm was beginning to be drained of strength.
4. I tried in my imagination to write in bright letters outside my little heart the
words, ‘O God’.
5. I didn’t tremble. I didn’t cry out.
6. I looked into the mirror and smiled. It was an attractive smile.
7. I was suddenly a man of flesh and blood.
8. I was after all a bachelor, and a doctor too on top of it!
9. The fellow had such a sense of cleanliness...! The rascal could have taken
it and used it after washing it with soap and water.
10. Was it trying to make an important decision about growing a moustache or
using eye shadow and mascara or wearing a vermilion spot on its forehead.
II. Expressions used to show fear
Can you find the expressions in the story that tell you that the author was
frightened? Read the story and complete the following sentences.
1. I was turned.
2. I sat there holding.
3. In the light of the lamp I sat there like.
III. In the sentences given below some words and expressions are italicised. They
are variously mean that one
• is very frightened.
• is too scared to move.
• is frightened by something that happens suddenly.
• makes another feel frightened.
Match the meanings with the words/expressions in italics, and write the
appropriate meaning next to the sentence. The first one has been done for you.
1. I knew a man was following me, I was scared out of my wits. (very frightened)
The Snake and the Mirror / 61
2019-202. I got a fright when I realised how close I was to the cliff edge.
3. He nearly jumped out of his skin when he saw the bull coming towards him.
4. You really gave me a fright when you crept up behind me like that.
5. Wait until I tell his story — it will make your hair stand on end.
6. Paralysed with fear, the boy faced his abductors.
7. The boy hid behind the door, not moving a muscle.
IV. Reported questions
Study these sentences:
• His friend asked, “Did you see the snake the next day, doctor?”
His friend asked the doctor whether/if he had seen the snake the next day.
• The little girl wondered, “Will I be home before the TV show begins?”
The little girl wondered if/whether she would be home before the TV show
began.
• Someone asked, “Why has the thief left the vest behind?”
Someone asked why the thief had left the vest behind.
The words if/whether are used to report questions which begin with: do, will,
can, have, are etc. These questions can be answered ‘yes’ or ‘no’.
Questions beginning with why/when/where/how/which/what are reported using
these same words.
The reporting verbs we use in questions with if/whether/why/when etc.
are: ask, inquire and wonder.
Remember that in reported speech,
• the present tense changes to past tense
• here, today, tomorrow, yesterday etc. change to there, that day, the next
day, the day before, etc.
• I/you change to me/him/he, etc., as necessary.
Example:
• He said to me, “I don’t believe you.”
He said he did not believe me.
• She said to him, ‘I don’t believe you.’
She told him that she did not believe him.
Report these questions using if/whether or why/when/where/how/which/what.
Remember the italicised verbs change into the past tense.
1. Meena asked her friend, “Do you think your teacher will come today?”
2. David asked his colleague, “Where will you go this summer?”
3. He asked the little boy, “Why are you studying English?”
4. She asked me, “When are we going to leave?”
5. Pran asked me, “Have you finished reading the newspaper?”
62 / Beehive
2019-206. Seema asked her, “How long have you lived here?”
7. Sheila asked the children, “Are you ready to do the work?”
Speaking
Using some of the expressions given above in exercise III, talk about an incident
when you were very scared. You may have a competition to decide whose story
was the most frightening.
Dictation
The following paragraph is about the Indian cobra. Read it twice and close your
book. Your teacher will then dictate the paragraph to you. Write it down with
appropriate punctuation marks.
The Indian cobra is the common name for members of the family of venomous
snakes, known for their intimidating looks and deadly bite. Cobras are
recognised by the hoods that they flare when angry or disturbed; the hoods
are created by the extension of the ribs behind the cobras’ heads. Obviously
the best prevention is to avoid getting bitten. This is facilitated by the fact
that humans are not the natural prey of any venomous snake. We are a bit
large for them to swallow whole and they have no means of chopping us up
into bite-size pieces. Nearly all snakebites in humans are the result of a
snake defending itself when it feels threatened. In general snakes are shy
and will simply leave if you give them a chance.
Writing
1. Try to rewrite the story without its humour, merely as a frightening incident.
What details or parts of the story would you leave out?
2. Read the description given alongside this sketch from a photograph in a
newspaper (Times of India, 4 September 1999). Make up a story about what
the monkey is thinking, or why it is looking into a mirror. Write a paragraph
about it.
THE FAIREST OF THEM ALL
A monkey preens itself using a piece
of mirror, in the Delhi ridge.
(‘To preen oneself ’ means to spend a lot of
time making oneself look attractive, and
then admiring one’s appearance. The word
is used in disapproval.)
The Snake and the Mirror / 63
2019-20Translation
The text you read is a translation of a story by a well-known Malayalam writer,
Vaikom Muhammad Basheer.
In translating a story from one language to another, a translator must keep the
content intact. However, the language and the style differ in different translations
of the same text.
Here are two translations of the opening paragraphs of a novel by the Japanese
writer, Haruki Murakami. Read them and answer the questions given below.
AB
When the phone rang I was in
the kitchen, boiling a potful of
spaghetti and whistling along
with an FM broadcast of the
overture to Rossini’s The
Thieving Magpie, which has to
be the perfect music for cooking
pasta.
I wanted to ignore the
phone, not only because the
spaghetti was nearly done, but
because Claudio Abbado was
bringing the London Symphony
to its musical climax.I’m in the kitchen cooking spaghetti
when the woman calls. Another
moment until the spaghetti is
done; there I am, whistling the
prelude to Rossini’s La Gazza
Ladra along with the FM radio.
Perfect spaghetti-cooking music!
I hear the telephone ring but
tell myself, Ignore it. Let the
spaghetti finish cooking. It’s
almost done, and besides,
Claudio Abbado and the London
Symphony Orchestra are coming
to a crescendo.
Compare the two translations on the basis of the following points.
• the tense of narration (past and present tense)
• short, incomplete sentences
• sentence length
Which of these translations do you like? Give reasons for your choice.
64 / Beehive
2019-20A Legend of the Northland
This poem narrates the legend of an old lady who angered
Saint Peter because of her greed.
Away, away in the Northland,
Where the hours of the day are few,
And the nights are so long in winter
That they cannot sleep them through;
Where they harness the swift reindeer
To the sledges, when it snows;
And the children look like bear’s cubs
In their funny, furry clothes:
They tell them a curious story —
I don’t believe ’tis true;
And yet you may learn a lesson
If I tell the tale to you.
Once, when the good Saint Peter
Lived in the world below,
And walked about it, preaching,
Just as he did, you know,
He came to the door of a cottage,
In travelling round the earth,
Where a little woman was making cakes,
And baking them on the hearth;
And being faint with fasting,
For the day was almost done,
He asked her, from her store of cakes,
To give him a single one.
2019-20So she made a very little cake,
But as it baking lay,
She looked at it, and thought it seemed
Too large to give away.
Therefore she kneaded another,
And still a smaller one;
But it looked, when she turned it over,
As large as the first had done.
Then she took a tiny scrap of dough,
And rolled and rolled it flat;
And baked it thin as a wafer —
But she couldn’t part with that.
For she said, “My cakes that seem too small
When I eat of them myself
Are yet too large to give away.”
So she put them on the shelf.
Then good Saint Peter grew angry,
For he was hungry and faint;
And surely such a woman
Was enough to provoke a saint.
And he said, “You are far too selfish
To dwell in a human form,
To have both food and shelter,
And fire to keep you warm.
Now, you shall build as the birds do,
And shall get your scanty food
By boring, and boring, and boring,
All day in the hard, dry wood.”
Then up she went through the chimney,
Never speaking a word,
And out of the top flew a woodpecker,
For she was changed to a bird.
66 / Beehive
2019-20She had a scarlet cap on her head,
And that was left the same;
But all the rest of her clothes were burned
Black as a coal in the flame.
And every country schoolboy
Has seen her in the wood,
Where she lives in the trees till this very day,
Boring and boring for food.
PHOEBE CARY
A ballad is a song narrating a story in short stanzas. Ballads
are a part of folk culture or popular culture and are passed on
orally from one generation to the next. ‘A Legend of the Northland’
is a ballad.
GLOSSARY
legend: old traditional story
Saint Peter: an apostle of Christ
provoke: make angry
Thinking about the Poem
I. 1. Which country or countries do you think “the Northland” refers to?
2. What did Saint Peter ask the old lady for? What was the lady’s reaction?
3. How did he punish her?
4. How does the woodpecker get her food?
5. Do you think that the old lady would have been so ungenerous if she had
known who Saint Peter really was? What would she have done then?
6. Is this a true story? Which part of this poem do you feel is the most important?
7. What is a legend? Why is this poem called a legend?
8. Write the story of ‘A Legend of the Northland’ in about ten sentences.
II. 1. Let’s look at the words at the end of the second and fourth lines, viz., ‘snows’
and ‘clothes’, ‘true’ and ‘you’, ‘below’ and ‘know.’ We find that ‘snows’ rhymes
with ‘clothes’, ‘true’ rhymes with ‘you’ and ‘below’ rhymes with ‘know’.
Find more such rhyming words.
2. Go to the local library or talk to older persons in your locality and find legends
in your own language. Tell the class these legends.
A Legend of the Northland / 67
2019-206. My Childhood
BEFORE YOU READ
•Can you think of any scientists, who have also been
statesmen?
•A.P.J. Abdul Kalam, whose projects in space, defence and
nuclear technology guided India into the twenty-first century,
became our eleventh President in 2002.
•In his autobiography, Wings of Fire, he speaks of his
childhood.
1. I WAS born into a middle-class Tamil family in the
island town of Rameswaram in the erstwhile Madras
State. My father, Jainulabdeen, had neither much
formal education nor much wealth; despite these
disadvantages, he possessed great innate wisdom
and a true generosity of spirit. He had an ideal
helpmate in my mother, Ashiamma. I do not recall
the exact number of people she fed every day, but I
am quite certain that far more outsiders ate with
us than all the members of our own family
put together.
2. I was one of many children — a short boy with
rather undistinguished looks, born to tall and
handsome parents. We lived in our ancestral house,
which was built in the middle of the nineteenth
century. It was a fairly large pucca house, made of
limestone and brick, on the Mosque Street in
Rameswaram. My austere father used to avoid all
inessential comforts and luxuries. However, all
necessities were provided for, in terms of food,
medicine or clothes. In fact, I would say mine
was a very secure childhood, both materially
and emotionally.
2019-20
erstwhile: former
innate: inborn; (a
quality or feeling) in
one’s nature
austere: simple,
strict and severe3. The Second World War broke out in 1939, when I
was eight years old. For reasons I have never been
able to understand, a sudden demand for tamarind
seeds erupted in the market. I used to collect the
seeds and sell them to a provision shop on Mosque
Street. A day’s collection would fetch me the princely
sum of one anna. My brother-in-law Jallaluddin
would tell me stories about the War which I would
later attempt to trace in the headlines in Dinamani.
Our area, being isolated, was completely unaffected
by the War. But soon India was forced to join the
Allied Forces and something like a state of
emergency was declared. The first casualty came
in the form of the suspension of the train halt at
Rameswaram station. The newspapers now had to
be bundled and thrown out from the moving train
on the Rameswaram Road between Rameswaram
and Dhanuskodi. That forced my cousin Samsuddin,
who distributed newspapers in Rameswarm, to look
for a helping hand to catch the bundles and, as if
naturally, I filled the slot. Samsuddin helped me
earn my first wages. Half a century later, I can still
feel the surge of pride in earning my own money for
the first time.
4. Every child is born, with some inherited
characteristics, into a specific socio-economic and
emotional environment, and trained in certain ways
by figures of authority. I inherited honesty and self-
discipline from my father; from my mother, I
inherited faith in goodness and deep kindness and
so did my three brothers and sister. I had three
close friends in my childhood — Ramanadha Sastry,
Aravindan and Sivaprakasan. All these boys were
from orthodox Hindu Brahmin families. As children,
none of us ever felt any difference amongst ourselves
because of our religious differences and upbringing.
In fact, Ramanadha Sastry was the son of Pakshi
Lakshmana Sastry, the high priest of the
Rameswaram temple. Later, he took over the
priesthood of the Rameswaram temple from his
princely sum:
generous amount
(here, ironic)
anna: an old Indian
coin, worth about six
paise
Allied Forces: the
armies of U.K.,
U.S.A. and Russia
during the Second
World War
My Childhood /69
2019-20Our family used to arrange boats for carrying idols
of the Lord from the temple to the marriage site.
father; Aravindan went into the business of
arranging transport for visiting pilgrims; and
Sivaprakasan became a catering contractor for the
Southern Railways.
5. During the annual Shri Sita Rama Kalyanam
ceremony, our family used to arrange boats with a
special platform for carrying idols of the Lord from
the temple to the marriage site, situated in the
middle of the pond called Rama Tirtha which was
near our house. Events from the Ramayana and
from the life of the Prophet were the bedtime stories
my mother and grandmother would tell the children
in our family.
6. One day when I was in the fifth standard at the
Rameswaram Elementary School, a new teacher
came to our class. I used to wear a cap which
marked me as a Muslim, and I always sat in the
front row next to Ramanadha Sastry, who wore the
70 / Beehive
2019-20sacred thread. The new teacher could not stomach
a Hindu priest’s son sitting with a Muslim boy. In
accordance with our social ranking as the new
teacher saw it, I was asked to go and sit on the
back bench. I felt very sad, and so did Ramanadha
Sastry. He looked utterly downcast as I shifted to
my seat in the last row. The image of him weeping
when I shifted to the last row left a lasting
impression on me.
7. After school, we went home and told our respective
parents about the incident. Lakshmana Sastry
summoned the teacher, and in our presence, told
the teacher that he should not spread the poison of
social inequality and communal intolerance in the
minds of innocent children. He bluntly asked the
teacher to either apologise or quit the school and
the island. Not only did the teacher regret his
behaviour, but the strong sense of conviction
Lakshmana Sastry conveyed ultimately reformed
this young teacher.
could not stomach:
could not tolerate
downcast: sad or
depressed
conviction: a strong
opinion or belief
My Childhood /71
2019-20I always sat in the front row next
to Ramanadha Sastry.
8. On the whole, the small society of Rameswaram
was very rigid in terms of the segregation of different
social groups. However, my science teacher
Sivasubramania Iyer, though an orthodox Brahmin
with a very conservative wife, was something of a
rebel. He did his best to break social barriers so
that people from varying backgrounds could mingle
easily. He used to spend hours with me and would
say, “Kalam, I want you to develop so that you
are on par with the highly educated people of the
big cities.”
9. One day, he invited me to his home for a meal. His
wife was horrified at the idea of a Muslim boy being
invited to dine in her ritually pure kitchen. She
refused to serve me in her kitchen. Sivasubramania
Iyer was not perturbed, nor did he get angry
with his wife, but instead, served me with
72 / Beehive
2019-20
ritually pure: kept
protected from all
outside influences
for the observances
of religionhis own hands and sat down beside me to eat his
meal. His wife watched us from behind the kitchen
door. I wondered whether she had observed any
difference in the way I ate rice, drank water or
cleaned the floor after the meal. When I was leaving
his house, Sivasubramania Iyer invited me to join
him for dinner again the next weekend. Observing
my hesitation, he told me not to get upset, saying,
“Once you decide to change the system, such
problems have to be confronted.” When I visited his
house the next week, Sivasubramania Iyer’s wife
took me inside her kitchen and served me food with
her own hands.
10. Then the Second World War was over and India’s
freedom was imminent. “Indians will build their
own India,” declared Gandhiji. The whole country
was filled with an unprecedented optimism. I asked
my father for permission to leave Rameswaram
and study at the district headquarters in
Ramanathapuram.
Sivasubramania Iyer’s wife took me inside
her kitchen and served me food.
My Childhood /73
2019-2011. He told me as if thinking aloud, “Abul ! I know you
have to go away to grow. Does the seagull not fly
across the sun, alone and without a nest?” He quoted
Khalil Gibran to my hesitant mother, “Your children
are not your children. They are the sons and daughters
of Life’s longing for itself. They come through you but
not from you. You may give them your love but not
your thoughts. For they have their own thoughts.”
A.P.J. ABDUL KALAM
[an extract from Wings of Fire]
Thinking about the T
Teext
Activity
Find Dhanuskodi and Rameswaram on the map. What
language(s) do you think are spoken there? What languages do
you think the author, his family, his friends and his teachers
spoke with one another?
Chennai
Nagappattinam
Ramanathapuram
Pamban
Island
Sri Lanka
© Government of India Copyright, 2003
74 / Beehive
2019-20I. Answer these questions in one or two sentences each.
1. Where was Abdul Kalam’s house?
2. What do you think Dinamani is the name of? Give a reason for your answer.
3. Who were Abdul Kalam’s school friends? What did they later become?
4. How did Abdul Kalam earn his first wages?
5. Had he earned any money before that? In what way?
II. Answer each of these questions in a short paragraph (about 30 words)
1. How does the author describe: (i) his father, (ii) his mother, (iii) himself?
2. What characteristics does he say he inherited from his parents?
III. Discuss these questions in class with your teacher and then write down your
answers in two or three paragraphs each.
1. “On the whole, the small society of Rameswaram was very rigid in terms of
the segregation of different social groups,” says the author.
(i) Which social groups does he mention? Were these groups easily
identifiable (for example, by the way they dressed)?
(ii) Were they aware only of their differences or did they also naturally share
friendships and experiences? (Think of the bedtime stories in Kalam’s
house; of who his friends were; and of what used to take place in the
pond near his house.)
(iii) The author speaks both of people who were very aware of the differences
among them and those who tried to bridge these differences. Can you
identify such people in the text?
(iv) Narrate two incidents that show how differences can be created, and
also how they can be resolved. How can people change their attitudes?
2.
(i) Why did Abdul Kalam want to leave Rameswaram?
(ii) What did his father say to this?
(iii) What do you think his words mean? Why do you think he spoke those
words?
Thinking about Language
I. Find the sentences in the text where these words occur:
erupt
surge
trace
undistinguished
casualty
Look these words up in a dictionary which gives examples of how they are used.
Now answer the following questions.
1. What are the things that can erupt? Use examples to explain the various
meanings of erupt. Now do the same for the word surge. What things can
surge?
My Childhood /75
2019-202. What are the meanings of the word trace and which of the meanings is
closest to the word in the text?
3. Can you find the word undistinguished in your dictionary? (If not, look up
the word distinguished and say what undistinguished must mean.)
II. 1. Match the phrases in Column A with their meanings in Column B.
A
B
(i) broke out
(a) an attitude of kindness, a readiness to
give freely
(ii) in accordance with(b) was not able to tolerate
(iii) a helping hand(c) began suddenly in a violent way
(iv) could not stomach(d) assistance
(v) generosity of spirit(e) persons with power to make decisions
(vi) figures of authority(f) according to a particular rule, principle,
or system
2. Study the words in italics in the sentences below. They are formed by prefixing
un – or in – to their antonyms (words opposite in meaning).
• I was a short boy with rather undistinguished looks. (un + distinguished)
• My austere father used to avoid all inessential comforts.(in + essential)
• The area was completely unaffected by the war.(un + affected)
• He should not spread the poison of social inequality and communal
intolerance. (in + equality, in + tolerance)
Now form the opposites of the words below by prefixing un- or in-. The prefix in-
can also have the forms il-, ir-, or im- (for example: illiterate –il + literate,
impractical – im + practical, irrational – ir + rational). You may consult a dictionary
if you wish.
adequateacceptableregulartolerant
demandingactivetruepermanent
patrioticdisputedaccessiblecoherent
logicallegalresponsiblepossible
III. Passive Voice
Study these sentences:
• My parents were regarded as an ideal couple.
• I was asked to go and sit on the back bench.
• Such problems have to be confronted.
76 / Beehive
2019-20The italicised verbs in these sentences are made up of a form of the verb be and
a past participle. (For example: were + regarded, was + asked, be + confronted)
These sentences focus on what happens, rather than who does what. Notice
that the doer of the action is not included in the sentences.
If necessary, we can mention the doer of the action in a by-phrase. For example:
• The tree was struck by lightning.
• The flag was unfurled by the Chief Guest.
IV. Rewrite the sentences below, changing the verbs in brackets into the passive
form.
1. In yesterday’s competition the prizes (give away) by the Principal.
2. In spite of financial difficulties, the labourers (pay) on time.
3. On Republic Day, vehicles (not allow) beyond this point.
4. Second-hand books (buy and sell) on the pavement every Saturday.
5. Elections to the Lok Sabha (hold) every five years.
6. Our National Anthem (compose) Rabindranath Tagore.
V. Rewrite the paragraphs below, using the correct form of the verb given in
brackets.
How Helmets Came To Be Used in Cricket
1.
Nari Contractor was the Captain and an opening batsman for India in the
1960s. The Indian cricket team went on a tour to the West Indies in 1962.
In a match against Barbados in Bridgetown, Nari Contractor (seriously injure
and collapse). In those days helmets (not wear). Contractor (hit) on the head
by a bouncer from Charlie Griffith. Contractor’s skull (fracture). The entire
team (deeply concern). The West Indies players (worry). Contractor (rush ) to
hospital. He (accompany) by Frank Worrell, the Captain of the West Indies
Team. Blood (donate) by the West Indies players. Thanks to the timely help,
Contractor (save). Nowadays helmets (routinely use) against bowlers.
Oil from Seeds
2.
Vegetable oils (make) from seeds and fruits of many plants growing all over
the world, from tiny sesame seeds to big, juicy coconuts. Oil (produce) from
cotton seeds, groundnuts, soya beans and sunflower seeds. Olive oil (use)
for cooking, salad dressing etc. Olives (shake) from the trees and (gather)
up, usually by hand. The olives (ground) to a thick paste which is spread
onto special mats. Then the mats (layer) up on the pressing machine which
will gently squeeze them to produce olive oil.
Dictation
Let the class divide itself into three groups. Let each group take down one passage
that the teacher dictates. Then put the passages together in the right order.
My Childhood /77
2019-20To Sir, with Love
1. From Rameswaram to the Rashtrapati Bhavan, it’s been a long journey.
Talking to Nona Walia on the eve of Teacher’s Day, President Dr A.P.J. Abdul
Kalam talks about life’s toughest lessons learnt and his mission — being a
teacher to the Indian youth. “A proper education would help nurture a sense
of dignity and self-respect among our youth,” says President Kalam.
There’s still a child in him though, and he’s still curious about learning
new things. Life’s a mission for President Kalam.
2.Nonetheless, he remembers his first lesson in life and how it changed
his destiny. “I was studying in Standard V, and must have been all of 10. My
teacher, Sri Sivasubramania Iyer was telling us how birds fly. He drew a
diagram of a bird on the blackboard, depicting the wings, tail and the body
with the head and then explained how birds soar to the sky. At the end of
the class, I said I didn’t understand. Then he asked the other students if
they had understood, but nobody had understood how birds fly,” he recalls.
3.“That evening, the entire class was taken to Rameswarm shore,” the
President continues. “My teacher showed us sea birds. We saw marvellous
formations of them flying and how their wings flapped. Then my teacher
asked us, ‘Where is the birds’ engine and how is it powered?’ I knew then
that birds are powered by their own life and motivation. I understood all
about birds’ dynamics. This was real teaching — a theoretical lesson coupled
with a live practical example. Sri Siva Subramania Iyer was a great teacher.”
That day, my future was decided. My destiny was changed. I knew my
future had to be about flight and flight systems.
Speaking
Here is a topic for you to
1. think about;
2. give your opinion on.
Find out what other people think about it. Ask your friends/seniors/parents to
give you their opinion.
‘Career Building Is the Only Goal of Education.’
or
‘Getting a Good Job Is More Important than Being a Good Human Being.’
You can use the following phrases
(i) while giving your opinion:
• I think that ...
• In my opinion ...
• It seems to me that ...
78 / Beehive
2019-20• I am of the view that ...
• As far as I know ...
• If you ask me ...
(ii) saying what other people think:
• According to some ...
• Quite a few think ...
• Some others favour ...
• Thirty per cent of the people disagree ...
• Fifty per cent of them strongly feel ...
(iii) asking for others’ opinions:
• What do you think about ...
• What do you think of ...
• What is your opinion about ...
• Do you agree ...
• Does this make you believe ...
Writing
Think and write a short account of what life in Rameswaram in the 1940s must
have been like. (Were people rich or poor? Hard working or lazy? Hopeful of
change, or resistant to it?).
Do your little bit of good where you are; it’s
those little bits of good put together that
overwhelm the world.
ARCHBISHOP DESMOND TUTU
My Childhood /79
2019-20No Men Are FForeign
oreign
Have you ever thought of some people as strange, or other
countries as ‘foreign’? We have many ways of thinking of
other people as different from ‘us’, as ‘them.’ ‘ They’ may
belong to a different country, or speak a different language.
In this poem, however, the poet reminds us of the many ways
in which we are all the same — for we are all human.
Remember, no men are strange, no countries foreign
Beneath all uniforms, a single body breathes
Like ours: the land our brothers walk upon
Is earth like this, in which we all shall lie.
They, too, aware of sun and air and water,
Are fed by peaceful harvests, by war’s long winter starv’d.
Their hands are ours, and in their lines we read
A labour not different from our own.
Remember they have eyes like ours that wake
Or sleep, and strength that can be won
By love. In every land is common life
That all can recognise and understand.
Let us remember, whenever we are told
To hate our brothers, it is ourselves
That we shall dispossess, betray, condemn.
Remember, we who take arms against each other
It is the human earth that we defile.
Our hells of fire and dust outrage the innocence
Of air that is everywhere our own,
Remember, no men are foreign, and no countries strange.
JAMES KIRKUP
2019-20GLOSSARY
dispossess: dislodge; deprive
defile: make dirty; pollute
outrage the innocence of: violate the purity of
Thinking about the Poem
1.
(i) “Beneath all uniforms . . .” What uniforms do you think the poet is
speaking about?
(ii) How does the poet suggest that all people on earth are the same?
2. In stanza 1, find five ways in which we all are alike. Pick out the words.
3. How many common features can you find in stanza 2 ? Pick out the words.
4. “... whenever we are told to hate our brothers ...” When do you think this
happens? Why? Who ‘tells’ us? Should we do as we are told at such times?
What does the poet say?
I am a citizen, not of Athens or Greece, but
of the world.
SOCRATES
No Men Are Foreign /81
2019-207. Packing
BEFORE YO U RE A D
•Do you like going on trips? What kind of trips do you enjoy
most?
•How do you feel about having to pack for a trip?
•Have you ever discovered on a trip that you have forgotten to
pack a few things you very much need, or that you can’t find
them easily?
•
Does this make you angry or does it make you laugh at
yourself?
Now read this description of how the author and his friends
pack.
1. I SAID I’d pack.
I rather pride myself on my packing. Packing
is one of those many things that I feel I know
more about than any other person living. (It
surprises me myself, sometimes, how many such
things there are.) I impressed the fact upon George
and Harris and told them that they had better
leave the whole matter entirely to me. They fell
into the suggestion with a readiness that had
something uncanny about it. George spread
himself over the easy-chair, and Harris cocked
his legs on the table.
2. This was hardly what I intended. What I had meant,
of course, was, that I should boss the job, and
that Harris and George should potter about under
my directions, I pushing them aside every now and
then with, “Oh, you!” “Here, let me do it.” “There
you are, simple enough!” — really teaching them,
as you might say. Their taking it in the way
2019-20
pride myself on: am
proud of
fell into: here,
accepted
uncanny: strange,
weird
potter about: do
some unimportant
things3.
4.
5.
6.
they did irritated me. There is nothing does irritate
me more than seeing other people sitting about doing
nothing when I’m working.
I lived with a man once who used to make me mad
that way. He would loll on the sofa and watch me
doing things by the hour together. He said it did
him real good to look on at me, messing about.
Now, I’m not like that. I can’t sit still and see
another man slaving and working. I want to get up
and superintend, and walk round with my hands
in my pockets, and tell him what to do. It is my
energetic nature. I can’t help it.
However, I did not say anything, but started the
packing. It seemed a longer job than I had thought
it was going to be; but I got the bag finished at last,
and I sat on it and strapped it.
“Ain’t you going to put the boots in?” said Harris.
And I looked round, and found I had forgotten them.
That’s just like Harris. He couldn’t have said a word
until I’d got the bag shut and strapped, of course.
And George laughed — one of those irritating,
senseless laughs of his. They do make me so wild.
I opened the bag and packed the boots in; and then,
just as I was going to close it, a horrible idea
occurred to me. Had I packed my toothbrush? I don’t
know how it is, but I never do know whether I’ve
packed my toothbrush.
My toothbrush is a thing that haunts me when I’m
travelling, and makes my life a misery. I dream
that I haven’t packed it, and wake up in a cold
perspiration, and get out of bed and hunt for it.
And, in the morning, I pack it before I have used it,
and have to unpack again to get it, and it is always
the last thing I turn out of the bag; and then I
repack and forget it, and have to rush upstairs for
it at the last moment and carry it to the railway
station, wrapped up in my pocket-handkerchief.
Of course I had to turn every mortal thing out now,
and, of course, I could not find it. I rummaged the
things up into much the same state that they
haunts: here, to
repeatedly give
trouble
every mortal thing:
every ordinary thing
rummaged: searched
in a hurried or
careless way
Packing / 83
2019-20I found the toothbrush inside a boot.
must have been before the world was created, and
when chaos reigned. Of course, I found George’s
and Harris’s eighteen times over, but I couldn’t find
my own. I put the things back one by one, and held
everything up and shook it. Then I found it inside a
boot. I repacked once more.
7. When I had finished, George asked if the soap was in.
I said I didn’t care a hang whether the soap was in or
whether it wasn’t; and I slammed the bag shut and
strapped it, and found that I had packed my spectacles
in it, and had to re-open it. It got shut up finally at
10.05 p.m., and then there remained the hampers to
do. Harris said that we should be wanting to start in
less than twelve hours’ time and thought that he and
George had better do the rest; and I agreed and sat
down, and they had a go.
8. They began in a light-hearted spirit, evidently
intending to show me how to do it. I made no
84 / Beehive
2019-20
hampers: large
baskets for carrying
foodcomment; I only waited. With the exception of
George, Harris is the worst packer in this world;
and I looked at the piles of plates and cups, and
kettles, and bottles, and jars, and pies, and stoves,
and cakes, and tomatoes, etc., and felt that the
thing would soon become exciting.
It did. They started with breaking a cup. That
was the first thing they did. They did that just to
show you what they could do, and to get you
interested.
Then Harris packed the strawberry jam on top
of a tomato and squashed it, and they had to pick
out the tomato with a teaspoon.
9. And then it was George’s turn, and he trod on the
butter. I didn’t say anything, but I came over and
sat on the edge of the table and watched them.
trod on: stepped on
George trod on the butter.
Packing / 85
2019-20It irritated them more than anything I could have
said. I felt that. It made them nervous and excited,
and they stepped on things, and put things behind
them, and then couldn’t find them when they
wanted them; and they packed the pies at the
bottom, and put heavy things on top, and smashed
the pies in.
10. They upset salt over everything, and as for the
butter! I never saw two men do more with one-and-
two pence worth of butter in my whole life than
they did. After George had got it off his slipper, they
tried to put it in the kettle. It wouldn’t go in, and
what was in wouldn’t come out. They did scrape it
out at last, and put it down on a chair, and Harris
sat on it, and it stuck to him, and they went looking
for it all over the room.
11. “I’ll take my oath I put it down on that chair,” said
George, staring at the empty seat.
“I saw you do it myself, not a minute ago,” said
Harris.
Then they started round the room again looking
for it; and then they met again in the centre and
stared at one another.
“Most extraordinary thing I ever heard of,” said
George.
“So mysterious!” said Harris.
Then George got round at the back of Harris
and saw it.
“Why, here it is all the time,” he exclaimed,
indignantly.
“Where?” cried Harris, spinning round.
“Stand still, can’t you!” roared George, flying
after him.
And they got it off, and packed it in the teapot.
12. Montmorency was in it all, of course. Montmorency’s
ambition in life is to get in the way and be sworn
at. If he can squirm in anywhere where he
particularly is not wanted, and be a perfect
nuisance, and make people mad, and have
86 / Beehive
2019-20
be sworn at: here,
get scoldedMontmorency got into the hamper ... before
Harris could land him with the frying-pan.
things thrown at his head, then he feels his day
has not been wasted.
To get somebody to stumble over him, and curse
him steadily for an hour, is his highest aim and
object; and, when he has succeeded in
accomplishing this, his conceit becomes quite
unbearable.
13. He came and sat down on things, just when they
were wanted to be packed; and he laboured under
the fixed belief that, whenever Harris
or George reached out their hand for anything,
it was his cold damp nose that they wanted.
He put his leg into the jam, and he worried
the teaspoons, and he pretended that the lemons
were rats, and got into the hamper and killed
conceit: here, his
pride in himself
worried: disturbed
Packing / 87
2019-20three of them before Harris could land him with
the frying-pan.
14. Harris said I encouraged him. I didn’t encourage him.
A dog like that doesn’t want any encouragement. It’s
the natural, original sin that is born in him that
makes him do things like that.
The packing was done at 12.50; and Harris sat
on the big hamper, and said he hoped nothing would
be found broken. George said that if anything was
broken it was broken, which reflection seemed to
comfort him. He also said he was ready for bed. We
were all ready for bed. Harris was to sleep with us
that night, and we went upstairs.
15. We tossed for beds, and Harris had to sleep with
me. He said :
“Do you prefer the inside or the outside, J.?”
I said I generally preferred to sleep inside a bed.
Harris said it was odd.
George said:
“What time shall I wake you fellows?”
Harris said:
“Seven.”
I said:
“No — six,” because I wanted to write some
letters.
Harris and I had a bit of a row over it, but at
last split the difference, and said half-past six.
“Wake us at 6.30, George,” we said.
16. George made no answer, and we found, on going
over, that he had been asleep for sometime; so we
placed the bath where he could tumble into it on
getting out in the morning, and went to bed
ourselves.
JEROME K. JEROME
[an extract from Three Men in a Boat]
88 / Beehive
2019-20
reflection: thought
split the difference:
this means that they
agreed on 6.30
because it was
halfway between six
and sevenThinking about the T
Teext
I. Discuss in pairs and answer each question below in a short paragraph
(30 – 40 words).
1. How many characters are there in the narrative? Name them. (Don’t forget
the dog!).
2. Why did the narrator (Jerome) volunteer to do the packing?
3. How did George and Harris react to this? Did Jerome like their reaction?
4. What was Jerome’s real intention when he offered to pack?
5. What did Harris say after the bag was shut and strapped? Why do you think
he waited till then to ask?
6. What “horrible idea” occurred to Jerome a little later?
7. Where did Jerome finally find the toothbrush?
8. Why did Jerome have to reopen the packed bag?
9. What did George and Harris offer to pack and why?
10. While packing the hamper, George and Harris do a number of foolish and
funny things. Tick the statements that are true.
(i) They started with breaking a cup.
(ii) They also broke a plate.
(iii) They squashed a tomato.
(iv) They trod on the butter.
(v) They stepped on a banana.
(vi) They put things behind them, and couldn’t find them.
(vii) They stepped on things.
(viii) They packed the pictures at the bottom and put heavy things on top.
(ix) They upset almost everything.
(x) They were very good at packing.
II. What does Jerome say was Montmorency’s ambition in life? What do you think
of Montmorency and why?
III. Discuss in groups and answer the following questions in two or three paragraphs
(100 –150 words)
1. Of the three, Jerome, George and Harris, who do you think is the best or
worst packer? Support your answer with details from the text.
2. How did Montmorency ‘contribute’ to the packing?
3. Do you find this story funny? What are the humorous elements in it?
(Pick out at least three, think about what happens, as well as how it is
described.)
Packing / 89
2019-20Thinking about Language
I. Match the words/phrases in Column A with their meanings in Column B.
A
B
1. slaving(i) a quarrel or an argument
2. chaos(ii) remove something from inside
another thing using a sharp tool
3. rummage(iii) strange, mysterious, difficult to
explain
4. scrape out(iv) finish successfully, achieve
5. stumble over, tumble into(v) search for something by moving
things around hurriedly or carelessly
6. accomplish(vi) complete confusion and disorder
7. uncanny(vii) fall, or step awkwardly while walking
8. (to have or get into) a row(viii) working hard
II. Use suitable words or phrases from Column A above to complete the paragraph
given below.
A Traffic Jam
During power cuts, when traffic lights go off, there is utter
at crossroads. Drivers add to the confusion by
over their right of way, and nearly come to blows.
Sometimes passers-by, seeing a few policemen
at
regulating traffic, step in to help. This gives them a feeling of having
something.
III. Look at the sentences below. Notice that the verbs (italicised) are all in their
bare form.
• Simple commands:
– Stand up!
– Put it here!
90 / Beehive
2019-20• Directions: (to reach your home)
Board Bus No.121 and get down at Sagar Restaurant. From there turn
right and walk till you reach a book shop. My home is just behind
the shop.
• Dos and don’ts:
– Always get up for your elders.
– Don’t shout in class.
• Instructions for making a fruit salad:
Ingredients
Oranges
– 2
Pineapple – one large piece
Cherries – 250 grams
Bananas – 2
Any other fruit you like
Wash the fruit. Cut them into small pieces. Mix them well. Add a few drops of
lime juice. Add sugar to taste. Now add some cream (or ice cream if you wish to
make fruit salad with ice cream.)
1. Now work in pairs. Give
(i) two commands to your partner.
(ii) two do’s and don’ts to a new student in your class.
(iii) directions to get to each other’s houses.
(iv) instructions for moving the body in an exercise or a dance, or for cooking
something.
2. The table below has some proverbs telling you what to do and what not to
do. Fill in the blanks and add a few more such proverbs to the table.
Positive
Negative
(i) Save for a rainy day.(i) Don’t cry over spilt milk.
(ii) Make hay while the sun shines.(ii) Don’t put the cart before the
horse.
(iii)before you leap.(iii)
a mountain out of a
mole hill.
(iv)and let live.(iv)
all your eggs in one
basket.
Packing / 91
2019-20Writing
You have seen how Jerome, George and Harris mess up their packing, especially
of the hamper. From their mistakes you must have thought of some dos and
don’ts for packing. Can you give some tips for packing by completing the
paragraph below?
First pack all the heavy items, especially the ones you don’t need right away.
Then . . .
Here are some words and phrases you can use to begin your sentences
with:
• Then
• Next
• Now
• Remember
• Don’t forget
• At last/Finally
Speaking
Look at this sentence.
“I told George and Harris that they had better leave the whole matter entirely
to me.”
The words had better are used
• in an advice or suggestion:
You had better take your umbrella; it looks like rain.
• in an order
You had better complete your homework before you go out to play.
• as a threat
You had better leave or I’ll have you arrested for trespass!
When we speak, we say you’d/I’d/he’d better, instead of you had better, etc.
Work in pairs to give each other advice, orders or suggestions, or even to threaten
each other. Imagine situations like the following: Your partner
1. hasn’t returned a book to the library.
2. has forgotten to bring lunch.
3. hasn’t got enough change for bus fare.
4. has found out a secret about you.
5. has misplaced your English textbook.
92 / Beehive
2019-20Activity
Collect some examples of instructions, directions, etc. from notice
boards and pamphlets. Bring them to class and display them, or
read them out. (You can collect examples in English as well as
other languages, Indian or foreign.)
Here is an example for you:
ENGLISH
FRANCAIS
Packing / 93
2019-20oo
The Duck and the Kangar
Kangaroo
This is a humorous poem of a kind known as ‘Nonsense Verse’,
by Edward Lear. Read it and enjoy.
I
Said the Duck to the Kangaroo,
“Good gracious! how you hop!
Over the fields and the water too,
As if you never would stop!
My life is a bore in this nasty pond,
And I long to go out in the world beyond!
I wish I could hop like you!”
Said the Duck to the Kangaroo.
2019-20II
“Please give me a ride on your back!”
Said the Duck to the Kangaroo.
“I would sit quite still, and say nothing but ‘Quack’,
The whole of the long day through!
And we’d go to the Dee, and the Jelly Bo Lee,
Over the land, and over the sea;
Please take me a ride! O do!”
Said the Duck to the Kangaroo.
III
Said the Kangaroo to the Duck,
“This requires some little reflection;
Perhaps on the whole it might bring me luck,
And there seems but one objection,
Which is, if you’ll let me speak so bold,
Your feet are unpleasantly wet and cold,
And would probably give me the roo-
Matiz!” said the Kangaroo.
The Duck and the Kangaroo / 95
2019-20IV
Said the Duck, “As I sat on the rocks,
I have thought over that completely,
And I bought four pairs of worsted socks
Which fit my web-feet neatly.
And to keep out the cold I’ve bought a cloak,
And every day a cigar I’ll smoke,
All to follow my own dear true
Love of a Kangaroo!”
V
Said the Kangaroo, “I’m ready!
All in the moonlight pale;
But to balance me well, dear Duck, sit steady!
And quite at the end of my tail!”
So away they went with a hop and a bound,
And they hopped the whole world three times round;
And who so happy — O who,
As the Duck and the Kangaroo?
96 / Beehive
2019-20eacher
Notes for the T
Teacher
Units 8–11
8. REACH FOR THE TOP
This unit has two biographical pieces that depict persistent endeavours to
reach the top. Part II of this unit is taken from a newspaper. The language is
very current and idiomatic. An exercise of matching words and phrases to
their meanings has been given as a pre-reading activity to facilitate students’
understanding and appreciation of this part of the text.
In this unit students are asked to imagine that they have to give a speech.
They may wish to read the texts of well-known speeches such as Nehru’s
‘Tryst with Destiny’. A speech is a formal use of spoken language. It must be
prepared meticulously.
The language is formal but should be made powerful by the use of balance
(“Ask not what your country can do for you, ask what you can do for your
country.” — Kennedy), imagery (“The light has gone out of our lives” — Nehru)
and other such rhetorical devices. It can be enriched by the use of examples
and anecdotes.
The Writing task of composing an article for a school magazine can be prepared
for by looking at other examples of such articles in newspapers. This task
makes a beginning in helping students to write for the print media. Encourage
them to work within a given word limit (such as 500 words, or 1000 words),
and to use everyday, contemporary language.
Help students to write a description of Santosh Yadav’s character by drawing
their attention to her background, likes and dislikes, her humanity and her
contribution to society.
9. THE BOND OF LOVE
This unit is about a strong attachment between a human being and a wild
animal that becomes a pet. Encourage the students to locate the incidents
that show this in the story, and to give examples from their own experience.
The exercise of referring to an index for obtaining specific information on a
given topic aims to strengthen students’ reference skills. Try to add some
examples of your own from other areas of the curriculum where consulting an
index is useful.
The passage to be dictated is a scrambled story. After the dictation, allow the
students to go through their writing carefully to rearrange the incidents logically.
The writing activities are designed to help students to build up an argument.
2019-2010. KATHMANDU
‘Kathmandu’ is excerpted from Heaven Lake, a travelogue in which Vikram
Seth gives an account of what he saw, thought and felt when he travelled from
China to Tibet, from Heaven Lake to the Himalayas.
The map reading activity and the activity on locating the possible routes (by
road, rail or air) from Kathmandu to different places in India are designed to
link the lesson to the outside world. Students may wish to consult brochures
or travel guides, visit a travel agency or call them on the telephone, speak to
people who have been to Nepal, and so on. This is a ‘communicative’ and
‘authentic’ task.
To prepare for the second Speaking task, students can listen to cricket/
football commentaries or eyewitness accounts of the Independence Day/
Republic Day parade in class or at home on radio or T.V. Encourage them
to observe the use of the language and follow the narration. Have a
discussion in the class on the features of the commentary (its language, its
liveliness, etc.)
A diary can be an opportunity to write freely about our life and the things
that happen to us — funny, sad, happy, embarrassing or fearful. We also
make notes on places we visit or our encounters with people.
The Writing task suggests that diary entries can form the basis of a
travelogue, and asks students to imagine a journey to Kathmandu. It may be
supplemented by an actual travelogue-writing task given after a long holiday,
or after a class trip out of the town.
11. IF I WERE YOU
This one-act play is to be read aloud in class by assigning roles to students.
Draw the students’ attention to the stage setting, stage directions, description
of the characters, their movements, gestures and tonal variations, since these
combine to bring out the effect of the play.
The play has many examples of wit and irony. Two examples are given in an
exercise. You can add a few more for the students to have a clear understanding.
The dictionary task in this unit is to help children locate the right meaning
from a dictionary for a word they come across while reading. The task draws
students’ attention to ‘signposts’ such as parts of speech that help match use
to meaning. Encourage the students to look at more entries in the dictionary
and observe the meanings of words that occur as different parts of speech
(adjective, noun, verb).
98 / Beehive
2019-208. Reach for the T
op
Top
Part I
Santosh Yadav
BEFORE YOU READ
•Think for a while and make a list of three to five persons you
idolise, or admire very much for their achievements. Your
idols may be from any sphere of life — sports, medicine,
media, or art and culture.
•Your teacher will then discuss your choices with you to find
out who the top five idols of your class are.
1. The only woman in the world who
has scaled Mt Everest twice was
born in a society where the birth of
a son was regarded as a blessing,
and a daughter, though not
considered a curse, was not
generally welcome. When her
mother was expecting Santosh, a
travelling ‘holy man’, giving her his
blessing, assumed that she wanted
a son. But, to everyone’s surprise,
the unborn child’s grandmother, who
was standing close by, told him that
they did not want a son. The ‘holy
man’
was
also
surprised!
Nevertheless, he gave the requested
blessing . . . and as destiny would
have it, the blessing seemed to work.
Santosh was born the sixth child in
a family with five sons, a sister to
2019-202.
3.
4.
5.
five brothers. She was born in the small village of
Joniyawas of Rewari District in Haryana.
The girl was given the name ‘Santosh’, which means
contentment. But Santosh was not always content
with her place in a traditional way of life. She began
living life on her own terms from the start. Where
other girls wore traditional Indian dresses, Santosh
preferred shorts. Looking back, she says now, “From
the very beginning I was quite determined that if I
chose a correct and a rational path, the others
around me had to change, not me.”
Santosh’s parents were affluent landowners who
could afford to send their children to the best
schools, even to the country’s capital, New Delhi,
which was quite close by. But, in line with the
prevailing custom in the family, Santosh had to
make do with the local village school. So, she decided
to fight the system in her own quiet way when
the right moment arrived. And the right moment
came when she turned sixteen. At sixteen, most of
the girls in her village used to get married.
Santosh was also under pressure from her parents
to do the same.
A marriage as early as that was the last thing on
her mind. She threatened her parents that she
would never marry if she did not get a proper
education. She left home and got herself enrolled
in a school in Delhi. When her parents refused to
pay for her education, she politely informed them
of her plans to earn money by working part time to
pay her school fees. Her parents then agreed to pay
for her education.
Wishing always to study “a bit more” and with her
father slowly getting used to her urge for more
education, Santosh passed the high school
examinations and went to Jaipur. She joined
Maharani College and got a room in Kasturba Hostel.
Santosh remembers, “Kasturba Hostel faced the
100 / Beehive
2019-20
in line with: following
or in accordance
with; according to
the last thing: the
least important thingAravalli Hills. I used to watch villagers from my
room, going up the hill and suddenly vanishing after
a while. One day I decided to check it out myself. I check it out: find out
found nobody except a few mountaineers. I asked if (the truth)
I could join them. To my pleasant surprise, they
answered in the affirmative and motivated me to
take to climbing.”
6. Then there was no looking back for this determined
young girl. She saved money and enrolled in a
course at Uttarkashi’s Nehru Institute of
Mountaineering. “My college semester in Jaipur was
to end in April but it ended on the nineteenth of
May. And I was supposed to be in Uttarkashi on
the twenty-first. So, I did not go back home; instead,
I headed straight for the training. I had to write a headed straight for :
letter of apology to my father without whose went towards
permission I had got myself enrolled at Uttarkashi.”
7. Thereafter, Santosh went on an
expedition every year. Her climbing
skills matured rapidly. Also, she
developed a remarkable resistance to
cold and the altitude. Equipped with
an iron will, physical endurance and
an amazing mental toughness, she
proved herself repeatedly. The
culmination of her hard work and
sincerity came in 1992, just four years
after she had shyly asked the Aravalli
mountaineers if she could join them.
At barely twenty years of age, Santosh
Yadav scaled Mt Everest, becoming the
youngest woman in the world to
achieve the feat. If her climbing skills,
physical fitness, and mental strength
impressed her seniors, her concern for
others and desire to work together with Iron will, physical endurance and
them found her a special place in the mental toughness characterise
Santosh Yadav.
hearts of fellow climbers.
Reach for the Top / 101
2019-208. During the 1992 Everest mission, Santosh Yadav
provided special care to a climber who lay dying at
the South Col. She was unfortunately unsuccessful
in saving him. However, she managed to save
another climber, Mohan Singh, who would have
met with the same fate had she not shared her
oxygen with him.
9. Within twelve months, Santosh found herself a
member of an Indo-Nepalese Women’s Expedition
that invited her to join them. She then scaled the
Everest a second time, thus setting a record as the
only woman to have scaled the Everest twice, and
securing for herself and India a unique place in the
annals of mountaineering. In recognition
of her achievements, the Indian government
bestowed upon her one of the nation’s top honours,
the Padmashri.
10. Describing her feelings when she was literally ‘on
top of the world’, Santosh has said, “It took some
time for the enormity of the moment to sink
in ... Then I unfurled the Indian tricolour and held
it aloft on the roof of the world. The feeling is
indescribable. The Indian flag was flying on top of
the world. It was truly a spiritual moment. I felt
proud as an Indian.”
Also a fervent environmentalist, Santosh
collected and brought down 500 kilograms of
garbage from the Himalayas.
top honours: highest
awards
the enormity of the
moment: a very great
moment
sink in: be
understood
held it aloft: held it
up high
fervent: having
strong and sincere
feelings
Thinking about the T
Teext
I. Answer these questions in one or two sentences each. (The paragraph numbers
within brackets provide clues to the answers.)
1. Why was the ‘holy man’ who gave Santosh’s mother his blessings surprised?
(1)
2. Give an example to show that even as a young girl Santosh was not ready to
accept anything unreasonable. (2)
3. Why was Santosh sent to the local school? (3)
102 / Beehive
2019-204. When did she leave home for Delhi, and why? (4)
5. Why did Santosh’s parents agree to pay for her schooling in Delhi? What
mental qualities of Santosh are brought into light by this incident? (4)
II. Answer each of these questions in a short paragraph (about 30 words).
1. How did Santosh begin to climb mountains?
2. What incidents during the Everest expedition show Santosh’s concern for
her team-mates?
3. What shows her concern for the environment?
4. How does she describe her feelings at the summit of the Everest?
5. Santosh Yadav got into the recor d books both times she scaled
Mt Everest. What were the reasons for this?
III. Complete the following statements.
1. From her room in Kasturba Hostel, Santosh used to
2. When she finished college, Santosh had to write a letter of apology to her
father because
3. During the Everest expedition, her seniors in the team admired her
while
endeared her to fellow climbers.
IV. Pick out words from the text that mean the same as the following words or
expressions. (Look in the paragraphs indicated.)
1. took to be true without proof (1):
2. based on reason; sensible; reasonable (2):
3. the usual way of doing things (3):
4. a strong desire arising from within (5):
5. the power to endure, without falling ill (7):
Reach for the Top / 103
2019-20Part II
Maria Sharapova
BEFORE YOU READ
•
A Russian girl, Maria Sharapova, reached the summit of
women’s tennis when she was barely eighteen. As you read
about her, see if you can draw a comparison between her
and Santosh Yadav.
• Match the following.
something disarmingquickly, almost immediately
at odds withmore calm, confident and in control
than people of her age usually are
glamorous attirein contrast to; not agreeing with
in almost no timesomething that makes you feel friendly,
taking away your suspiciousness
poised beyond her
yearssent off
packed offattractive and exciting clothes
launchedcausing strong feelings of sadness
heart wrenchingstarted
• As you read, look for the answers to these questions.
– Why was Maria sent to the United States?
– Why didn’t her mother go with her?
– What are her hobbies? What does she like?
– What motivates her to keep going?
1. T H E R E is something disarming about Maria
Sharapova, something at odds with her ready smile
and glamorous attire. And that something in her
lifted her on Monday, 22 August 2005 to the world
number one position in women’s tennis. All this
happened in almost no time. Poised beyond her
years, the Siberian born teenager took just four
years as a professional to reach the pinnacle.
104 / Beehive
2019-20Maria Sharapova won the women’s singles
at Wimbledon in 2004
2. However, the rapid ascent in a fiercely competitive
world began nine years before with a level of
sacrifice few children would be prepared to endure.
Little Maria had not yet celebrated her tenth
birthday when she was packed off to train in the
United States. That trip to Florida with her father
Yuri launched her on the path to success and
stardom. But it also required a heart-wrenching
two-year separation from her mother Yelena. The
latter was compelled to stay back in Siberia because
of visa restrictions. The nine-year -old girl had
already learnt an important lesson in life — that
tennis excellence would only come at a price.
3. “I used to be so lonely,” Maria Sharapova recalls. “I
missed my mother terribly. My father was working
as much as he could to keep my tennis-training
going. So, he couldn’t see me either.
4. “Because I was so young, I used to go to bed at
8 p.m. The other tennis pupils would come in at
Reach for the Top / 105
2019-2011 p.m. and wake me up and order me to tidy up
the room and clean it.
5. “Instead of letting that depress me, I became more
quietly determined and mentally tough.
I learnt how to take care of myself. I never thought
of quitting because I knew what I wanted. When
you come from nothing and you have nothing, then
it makes you very hungry and determined . . . I would
have put up with much more humiliation and insults
than that to steadfastly pursue my dream.”
6. That toughness runs through Maria even today. It
was the key to her bagging the women’s singles crown
at Wimbledon in 2004 and to her meteoric rise to
the world number one spot the following year.
7. While her journey from the frozen plains of Siberia
to the summit of women’s tennis has touched the
hearts of tennis fans, for the youngster herself there
appears to be no room for sentiment. The straight
looks and the answers she gives when asked about
her ambition make it amply clear that she considers
the sacrifices were worth it. “I am very, very
competitive. I work hard at what I do. It’s my job.”
This is her mantra for success.
8. Though Maria Sharapova speaks with a pronounced
American accent, she proudly parades her Russian
nationality. Clearing all doubts, she says, “I’m
Russian. It’s true that the U.S. is a big part of my
life. But I have Russian citizenship. My blood is
totally Russian. I will play the Olympics for Russia
if they want me.”
9. Like any number of teenaged sensations, Maria
Sharapova lists fashion, singing and dancing as her
hobbies. She loves reading the novels of Arthur Conan
Doyle. Her fondness for sophisticated evening gowns
appears at odds with her love of pancakes with
chocolate spread and fizzy orange drinks.
10. Maria Sharapova cannot be pigeon-holed or
categorised. Her talent, unwavering desire to
succeed and readiness to sacrifice have lifted her
to the top of the world. Few would grudge her the
106 / Beehive
2019-20riches she is now reaping. This is what she has to
say about her monetary gains from tennis:
“Of course, money is a motivation. Tennis is a
business and a sport, but the most important thing
is to become number one in the world. That’s the
dream that kept me going.”
Thinking about the T
Teext
Working in small groups of 4–5 students, go back over the two passages on
Santosh Yadav and Maria Sharapova and complete the table given below with
relevant phrases or sentences.
Points of
Comparison/Contrast
Santosh Yadav
Maria Sharapova
1. Their humble beginning
2. Their parents’ approach
3. Their will power and strong
desire to succeed
4. Evidence of their mental
toughness
5. Their patriotism
Thinking about Language
Look at the following sentences. They each have two clauses, or two parts each
with their own subject and verb or verb phrase. Often, one part (italicised) tells
us when or why something happened.
• I reached the market when most of the shops had closed. (Tells us when I
reached.)
• When Rahul Dravid walked back towards the pavilion, everyone stood up. (Tells
us when everyone stood up.)
• The telephone rang and Ganga picked it up. (Tells us what happened next.)
• Gunjan has been with us ever since the school began. (Tells us for how long he
has been with us.)
I. Identify the two parts in the sentences below by underlining the part that gives
us the information in brackets, as shown above.
1. Where other girls wore traditional Indian dresses, Santosh preferred shorts.
(Contrasts her dress with that of others)
Reach for the Top / 107
2019-202. She left home and got herself enrolled in a school in Delhi.(Tells us what
happened after the first action.)
3. She decided to fight the system when the right moment arrived.(Tells us
when she was going to fight the system.)
4. Little Maria had not yet celebrated her tenth birthday when she was packed
off to train in the United States. (Tells us when Maria was sent to the U.S.)
II. Now rewrite the pairs of sentences given below as one sentence.
1. Grandfather told me about the old days. All books were printed on paper then.
2. What do you do after you finish the book? Perhaps you just throw it away.
3. He gave the little girl an apple. He took the computer apart.
4. You have nothing. That makes you very determined.
5. I never thought of quitting. I knew what I wanted.
Dictation
Read the passage once. Then close your books. Your teacher will dictate the
story to you. Write it down with the correct punctuation and paragraphing.
The Raincoat
After four years of drought in a small town in the Northeast, the Vicar
gathered everyone together for a pilgrimage to the mountain, where they
would pray together and ask for the rain to return.
The priest noticed a boy in the group wearing a raincoat.
“Have you gone mad?” he asked. “It hasn’t rained in this region for
five years, the heat will kill you climbing the mountain.”
“I have a cold, father. If we are going to ask God for rain, can you
imagine the way back from the mountain? It’s going to be such a downpour
that I need to be prepared.”
At that moment a great crash was heard in the sky and the first
drops began to fall. A boy’s faith was enough to bring about a miracle
that not even those most prepared truly believed in.
(translated by JAMES MULHOLLAND)
Speaking
Imagine that you are Santosh Yadav, or Maria Sharapova. You have been invited
to speak at an All India Girls’ Athletic Meet, as chief guest. Prepare a short
speech to motivate the girls to think and dream big and make an effort to fulfil
their dreams, not allowing difficulties or defeat to discourage them. The following
words and phrases may help you.
•
•
•
•
•
self confident/confidence/sure of yourself
self assured/assurance/belief in yourself
morale/boost morale/raise morale
giving somebody a boost/fillip/lift
demoralising/unsure of yourself/insecure/lack confidence
108 / Beehive
2019-20Writing
Working in pairs, go through the table below that gives you information about
the top women tennis players since 1975. Write a short article for your school
magazine comparing and contrasting the players in terms of their duration at
the top. Mention some qualities that you think may be responsible for their brief
or long stay at the top spot.
Top-Ranked Women Players
I. The roll of honour of women who enjoyed life at the summit since everybody’s
favourite player, Chris Evert, took her place in 1975.
Name
Ranked on
Weeks as No. 1
Maria Sharapova (Russia)22 August 20051
Lindsay Davenport (U.S.)October 200482
Amelie Mauresmo (France)13 September 20045
Justine Henin-Hardenne (Belgium)20 October 200345
Kim Clijsters (Belgium)11 August 200312
Serena Williams (U.S.)8 July 200257
Venus Williams (U.S.)25 February 200211
Jennifer Capriati (U.S.)15 October 200117
Lindsay Davenport (U.S.)12 October 199882
Martina Hingis (Switzerland)31 March 1997209
Arantxa Sanchez-Vicario (Spain)6 February 199512
Monica Seles (U.S.)11 March 1991178
Steffi Graf (Germany)17 August 1987377
Tracy Austin (U.S.)7 April 198022
Martina Navratilova (U.S.)10 July 1978331
Chris Evert (U.S.)3 November 1975362
II. Which of these words would you use to describe Santosh Yadav? Find reasons
in the text to support your choices, and write a couple of paragraphs describing
Santosh’s character.
contenteddetermined
weak-willedfearful
resourceful
independent
polite
adventurous
pessimistic
patient
considerate
persevering
Reach for the Top / 109
2019-20ree
On Killing a T
Tree
You must have observed people cutting down trees. But can
they kill a tree? Is it easy to do so? Let’s read the poem and
find out what the poet says on killing a tree.
It takes much time to kill a tree,
Not a simple jab of the knife
Will do it. It has grown
Slowly consuming the earth,
Rising out of it, feeding
Upon its crust, absorbing
Years of sunlight, air, water,
And out of its leprous hide
Sprouting leaves.
So hack and chop
But this alone wont do it.
Not so much pain will do it.
The bleeding bark will heal
And from close to the ground
Will rise curled green twigs,
Miniature boughs
Which if unchecked will expand again
To former size.
No,
The root is to be pulled out —
Out of the anchoring earth;
It is to be roped, tied,
And pulled out — snapped out
2019-20Or pulled out entirely,
Out from the earth-cave,
And the strength of the tree exposed
The source, white and wet,
The most sensitive, hidden
For years inside the earth.
Then the matter
Of scorching and choking
In sun and air,
Browning, hardening,
Twisting, withering,
And then it is done.
GIEVE PATEL
GLOSSARY
jab: sudden rough blow
leprous hide: discoloured bark
hack: cut roughly by striking heavy blows
anchoring earth: Trees are held securely with the help of the roots in the earth.
snapped out: chopped out
scorching and choking: the drying up of the tree after being uprooted
Thinking about the Poem
I. 1. Can a “simple jab of the knife” kill a tree? Why not?
2. How has the tree grown to its full size? List the words suggestive of its life
and activity.
3. What is the meaning of “bleeding bark”? What makes it bleed?
4. The poet says “No” in the beginning of the third stanza. What does he mean
by this?
5. What is the meaning of “anchoring earth” and “earth cave”?
6. What does he mean by “the strength of the tree exposed”?
7. What finally kills the tree?
On Killing a Tree / 111
2019-20Read and Enjoy
Trees
I think that I shall never see
A poem lovely as a tree.
A tree whose hungry mouth is prest
Against the earth’s sweet flowing breast;
A tree that looks at God all day
And lifts her leafy arms to pray;
A tree that may in summer wear
A nest of robins in her hair;
Upon whose bosom snow has lain;
Who intimately lives with rain.
Poems are made by fools like me,
But only God can make a tree.
JOYCE KILMER
When eating fruit, think of the person who
planted the tree.
VOLTAIRE
112 / Beehive
2019-209. The Bond of Love
BEFORE YOU READ
•Can there be love and friendship between human beings and
wild animals? Let’s read a fascinating account of an orphaned
sloth bear that was rescued by the author.
•Sloth bears inhabit forested areas,
including the tropical rain forests of
India and grasslands at lower
elevations. Sloth bears have very
shaggy hair and long muzzles. Using
their claws to dig, they can then use
their lips to form a tube, which can go
deep into the ground, or into hard-to-
reach areas like dead trees for their
food. Their main food is termites. You
can hear them suck up their food from
several feet away.
1. I WILL begin with Bruno, my wife’s pet sloth bear. I
got him for her by accident.
Two years ago we were passing through the
sugarcane fields near Mysore. People were driving
away the wild pigs from the fields by shooting at
them. Some were shot and some escaped. We
thought that everything was over when suddenly a
black sloth bear came out panting in the hot sun.
2. Now I will not shoot a sloth bear wantonly but,
unfortunately for the poor beast, one of my
companions did not feel that way about it, and
promptly shot the bear on the spot.
3. As we watched the fallen animal we were surprised
to see that the black fur on its back moved and
left the prostrate body. Then we saw it was a
2019-20
wantonly: for no
good reason
prostrate: lying on
the ground facing
downwards4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
baby bear that had been riding on its mother’s back
when the sudden shot had killed her. The little
creature ran around its prostrate parent making a
pitiful noise.
I ran up to it to attempt a capture. It scooted into
the sugarcane field. Following it with my
companions, I was at last able to grab it by the
scruff of its neck while it snapped and tried to
scratch me with its long, hooked claws.
We put it in one of the gunny-bags we had brought
and when I got back to Bangalore I duly presented it
to my wife. She was delighted! She at once put a
coloured ribbon around its neck, and after discovering
the cub was a ‘boy’ she christened it Bruno.
Bruno soon took to drinking milk from a bottle. It
was but a step further and within a very few days
he started eating and drinking everything else. And
everything is the right word, for he ate porridge
made from any ingredients, vegetables, fruit, nuts,
meat (especially pork), curry and rice regardless of
condiments and chillies, bread, eggs, chocolates,
sweets, pudding, ice-cream, etc., etc., etc. As for
drink: milk, tea, coffee, lime-juice, aerated water,
buttermilk, beer, alcoholic liquor and, in fact,
anything liquid. It all went down with relish.
The bear became very attached to our two Alsatian
dogs and to all the children of the tenants living in
our bungalow. He was left quite free in his younger
days and spent his time in playing, running into
the kitchen and going to sleep in our beds.
One day an accident befell him. I put down poison
(barium carbonate) to kill the rats and mice that
had got into my library. Bruno entered the library
as he often did, and he ate some of the poison.
Paralysis set in to the extent that he could not stand
on his feet. But he dragged himself on his stumps
to my wife, who called me. I guessed what had
happened. Off I rushed in the car to the vet’s
residence. A case of poisoning! Tame Bear — barium
carbonate — what to do?
114 / Beehive
2019-20
scooted: ran away
condiments: spices9. Out came his medical books, and a feverish
reference to index began: “What poison did you say,
sir?” “Barium carbonate”. “Ah yes—B—Ba—Barium
Salts—Ah! Barium carbonate! Symptoms —
paralysis—treatment—injections of . . . Just a
minute, sir. I’ll bring my syringe and the medicine.”
A dash back to the car. Bruno still floundering
about on his stumps, but clearly weakening rapidly;
some vomiting, heavy breathing, with heaving flanks
and gaping mouth.
10. Hold him, everybody! In goes the hypodermic—
Bruno squeals — 10 c.c. of the antidote enters his
system without a drop being wasted. Ten minutes
later: condition unchanged! Another 10 c.c. injected!
Ten minutes later: breathing less stertorous —
Bruno can move his arms and legs a little although
he cannot stand yet. Thirty minutes later: Bruno
gets up and has a great feed! He looks at us
disdainfully, as much as to say, ‘What’s barium
carbonate to a big black bear like me?’ Bruno is
still eating.
11. Another time he found nearly one gallon of old engine
oil which I had drained from the sump of the
Studebaker and was keeping as a weapon against
the inroads of termites. He promptly drank the lot.
But it had no ill effects whatever.
12. The months rolled on and Bruno had grown many
times the size he was when he came. He had
equalled the Alsatians in height and had even
outgrown them. But was just as sweet, just as
mischievous, just as playful. And he was very fond
of us all. Above all, he loved my wife, and she loved
him too! She had changed his name from Bruno, to
Baba, a Hindustani word signifying ‘small boy’. And
he could do a few tricks, too. At the command, ‘Baba,
wrestle’, or ‘Baba, box,’ he vigorously tackled anyone
who came forward for a rough and tumble. Give
him a stick and say ‘Baba, hold gun’, and he pointed
the stick at you. Ask him, ‘Baba, where’s baby?’
and he immediately produced and cradled
floundering:
struggling to move
hypodermic: a long
needle used to give
an injection under
the skin
stertorous breathing:
noisy breathing (as in
snoring)
Studebaker: an old
American car
The Bond of Love / 115
2019-20affectionately a stump of wood which he had
carefully concealed in his straw bed. But because
of the tenants’ children, poor Bruno, or Baba, had
to be kept chained most of the time.
13. Then my son and I advised my wife, and friends
advised her too, to give Baba to the zoo at Mysore.
He was getting too big to keep at home. After some
weeks of such advice she at last consented. Hastily,
and before she could change her mind, a letter was
written to the curator of the zoo. Did he want a
tame bear for his collection? He replied, “Yes”. The
zoo sent a cage from Mysore in a lorry, a distance
of eighty-seven miles, and Baba was packed off.
14. We all missed him greatly; but in a sense we were
relieved. My wife was inconsolable. She wept and
fretted. For the first few days she would not eat a
thing. Then she wrote a number of letters to the
curator. How was Baba? Back came the replies,
“Well, but fretting; he refuses food too.”
15. After that, friends visiting Mysore were begged to
make a point of going to the zoo and seeing how
Baba was getting along. They reported that he was
well but looked very thin and sad. All the keepers
at the zoo said he was fretting. For three months I
managed to restrain my wife from visiting Mysore.
Then she said one day, “I must see Baba. Either
you take me by car; or I will go myself by bus or
train.” So I took her by car.
16. Friends had conjectured that the bear would not
recognise her. I had thought so too. But while she
was yet some yards from his cage Baba saw her
and recognised her. He howled with happiness. She
ran up to him, petted him through the bars, and he
stood on his head in delight.
17. For the next three hours she would not leave that
cage. She gave him tea, lemonade, cakes, ice-cream
and what not. Then ‘closing time’ came and we had
to leave. My wife cried bitterly; Baba cried bitterly;
even the hardened curator and the keepers
116 / Beehive
2019-20
curator: here, a
person in charge of
the zoo
fretting: worried;
unhappy; not relaxed
conjectured: formed
an opinion by
guessingfelt depressed. As for me, I had reconciled myself to
what I knew was going to happen next.
18. “Oh please, sir,” she asked the curator, “may I have
my Baba back”? Hesitantly, he answered, “Madam,
he belongs to the zoo and is Government property
now. I cannot give away Government property. But
if my boss, the superintendentat Bangalore agrees,
certainly you may have him back.”
19. There followed the return journey to Bangalore and
a visit to the superintendent’s bungalow. A tearful
pleading: “Baba and I are both fretting for each
other. Will you please give him back to me?” He
was a kind-hearted man and consented.
Not only that, but he wrote to the curator telling
For the next three hours she would not
leave that cage . . .
The Bond of Love / 117
2019-20him to lend us a cage for transporting the bear
to Bangalore.
20. Back we went to Mysore again, armed with the
superintendent’s letter. Baba was driven into a
small cage and hoisted on top of the car; the cage
was tied securely, and a slow and careful return
journey to Bangalore was accomplished.
21. Once home, a squad of coolies were engaged for
special work in our compound. An island was made
for Baba. It was twenty feet long and fifteen feet
wide, and was surrounded by a dry pit, or moat, six
feet wide and seven feet deep. A wooden box that
once housed fowls was brought and put on the
island for Baba to sleep in at night. Straw was placed
inside to keep him warm, and his ‘baby’, the gnarled
stump, along with his ‘gun’, the piece of bamboo,
both of which had been sentimentally preserved
since he had been sent away to the zoo, were put
back for him to play with.
22. In a few days the coolies hoisted the cage on to the
island and Baba was released. He was delighted;
standing on his hindlegs, he pointed his ‘gun’ and
cradled his ‘baby’. My wife spent hours sitting on a
chair there while he sat on her lap. He was fifteen
months old and pretty heavy too!
23. The way my wife reaches the island and leaves it is
interesting. I have tied a rope to the overhanging
branch of a mango tree with a loop at its end. Putting
one foot in the loop, she kicks off with the other, to
bridge the six-foot gap that constitutes the width of
the surrounding pit. The return journey is made
the same way. But who can say now that a sloth
bear has no sense of affection, no memory and no
individual characteristics?
KENNETH ANDERSON
118 / Beehive
2019-20
gnarled: rugged;
twisted
hoisted: raised by
means of ropes or
pulleysI. Thinking about the T
Teext
I. Given in the box are some headings. Find the relevant paragraphs in the text to
match the headings.
An Orphaned Cub; Bruno’s Food-chart; An Accidental Case of Poisoning;
Playful Baba; Pain of Separation; Joy of Reunion; A Request to the Zoo;
An Island in the Courtyard
II. Answer the following questions.
1. “I got him for her by accident.”
(i) Who says this?
(ii) Who do ‘him’ and ‘her’ refer to?
(iii) What is the incident referred to here?
2. “He stood on his head in delight.”
(i) Who does ‘he’ refer to?
(ii) Why was he delighted?
3. “We all missed him greatly: but in a sense we were relieved.”
(i) Who does ‘we all’ stand for?
(ii) Who did they miss?
(iii) Why did they nevertheless feel relieved?
III. Answer the following questions in 30 to 40 words each.
1. On two occasions Bruno ate/drank something that should not be eaten/
drunk. What happened to him on these occasions?
2. Was Bruno a loving and playful pet? Why, then, did he have to be sent away?
3. How was the problem of what to do with Bruno finally solved?
Thinking about Language
I. 1. Find these words in the lesson. They all have ie or ei in them.
f
ld
fr
ingred
nds
nts
hghtmisch
ghty-sevenrelved
vous
p
ce
2. Now here are some more words. Complete them with ei or ie. Consult a
dictionary if necessary.
belverecvewrdlsure
wghtrgnfgngrf
s
p
ze
rce
(There is a popular rule of spelling: ‘i’ before ‘e’ except after ‘c’. Check if this rule
is true by looking at the words above.)
The Bond of Love / 119
2019-20II. Here are some words with silent letters. Learn their spelling. Your teacher will
dictate these words to you. Write them down and underline the silent letters.
knockwrestlewalkwrong
kneehalfhonestdaughter
hoursreturnhornetcalm
couldsignislandbutton
III. How to look at an Index
An index is a list of names or topics that are to be found in a book. It is a list
arranged in alphabetical order at the end of a book.
The following paragraph shows that the doctor is consulting the index of a medical
book to find out which injection is appropriate for Bruno.
“Out came his medical books, and a feverish reference to index began:
What poison did you say, sir?” “Barium carbonate”. “Ah yes—B—Ba—
Barium Salts—Ah! Barium carbonate! Symptoms—paralysis—
treatment—injections of ... Just a minute, sir. I’ll bring my syringe and
the medicine.”
1. You have read about the French Revolution and you want to know more
about the Third Estate in the context of the French Revolution. You can
refer to the index of the book Living World History by T. Walter Wallbank and
Arnold Schrier:
Page no. 813
Page no. 826
On which pages in this book will you find information about the French
Revolution and the Third Estate?
2. To know what ‘Food Security’ and ‘Minimum Support Price’ mean in the
context of the economic growth of a country you can go to the subject index
given below from Poverty and Famines — An Essay on Entitlement and
Deprivation by Amartya Sen. Under which heading in the index are you
likely to find these topics?
120 / Beehive
2019-203. Given below is a portion of an index page from the book, French’s Index of
Differential Diagnosis, edited by F. Dudley Hart M.D., F.R.C.P.
Study the entries and find out whether the following topics are discussed in
the book.
(i) bronchitis due to cigarette smoking
(ii) heart failure due to bronchitis
(iii) bronchitis in children
IV. 1. The Narrative Present
Notice the incomplete sentences in the following paragraphs. Here the writer
is using incomplete sentences in the narration to make the incident more
dramatic or immediate. Can you rewrite the paragraph in complete
sentences?
(You can begin: The vet and I made a dash back to the car. Bruno was still
floundering ... )
The Bond of Love / 121
2019-20(i) A dash back to the car. Bruno still floundering about on his stumps,
but clearly weakening rapidly; some vomiting, heavy breathing, with
heaving flanks and gaping mouth.
Hold him, everybody! In goes the hypodermic—Bruno squeals —
10 c.c. of the antidote enters his system without a drop being wasted.
Ten minutes later: condition unchanged! Another 10 c.c injected! Ten
minutes later: breathing less stertorous — Bruno can move his arms
and legs a little although he cannot stand yet. Thirty minutes later:
Bruno gets up and has a great feed! He looks at us disdainfully, as
much as to say, ‘What’s barium carbonate to a big black bear like me?’
Bruno is still eating.
(ii) In the paragraphs above from the story the verbs are in the present
tense (eg. hold, goes, etc.). This gives the reader an impression of
immediacy. The present tense is often used when we give a commentary
on a game (cricket, football, etc.), or tell a story as if it is happening now.
It is, therefore, called the narrative present.
You will read more about the present tense in Unit 10.
2. Adverbs
Find the adverbs in the passage below. ( You’ve read about adverbs in Unit 1.)
We thought that everything was over when suddenly a black sloth bear
came out panting in the hot sun. Now I will not shoot a sloth-bear wantonly
but, unfortunately for the poor beast, one of my companions did not feel that
way about it, and promptly shot the bear on the spot.
(i) Complete the following sentences, using a suitable adverb ending in –ly.
(a) Rana does her homework
(b) It rains
.
in Mumbai in June.
.
(c) He does his work
(d) The dog serves his master
.
(ii) Choose the most suitable adverbs or adverbial phrases and complete
the following sentences.
(a) We should
sometimes, often)
get down from a moving train. (never,
(b) I was
in need of support after my poor
performance. (badly, occasionally, sometimes)
(c) Rita
met
with
an accident. The doctor examined
. (suddenly, seriously, immediately)
122 / Beehive
2019-20
her3. Take down the following scrambled version of a story, that your teacher will
dictate to you, with appropriate punctuation marks. Then, read the scrambled
story carefully and try to rewrite it rearranging the incidents.
A grasshopper, who was very hungry, saw her and said, “When did you
get the corn? I am dying of hunger.” She wanted to dry them. It was a
cold winter’s day, and an ant was bringing out some grains of corn from
her home. She had gathered the corn in summer.
“I was singing all day,” answered the grasshopper.
“If you sang all summer,” said the ant, “you can dance all winter.”
“What were you doing?” asked the ant again.
The grasshopper replied, “I was too busy.”
“I collected it in summer,” said the ant. “What were you doing in summer?
Why did you not store some corn?”
Speaking
‘Animals also feel the pleasure of love and the pain of separation’.
Make a presentation by giving examples from your own experience.
Writing
Pets have unique care and handling requirements and should only be kept by
those with the commitment to understand and meet their needs. Give your
argument in support of or against this statement.
or
There is an on-going debate on whether snake charmers should continue in
their profession. You can get some idea about the debate from the newspaper
clipping (The Hindu, 16 June 2004) given below. Read it, discuss in pairs or
groups, and write either for or against the profession of snake charmers.
Report comes in support of snake charmers
By Our Staff Reporter
NEW DELHI, J UNE 15. Over 30 years after the introduction of the Wildlife
Protection Act (WPA) that banned the catching of snakes in India, a small
community of snake charmers continues to practise the trade catching over
400,000 snakes every year — which ultimately die — in defiance of the law.
A report based on new research by the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI),
however, has strongly recommended that the traditional knowledge of the
snake charmers and skills be now utilised for education and medicine by
setting up sapera centres. This is mainly because the community has
virtually no access to land, education or employment opportunities. They
are dependent on snake charming to earn a livelihood. They trade around
The Bond of Love / 123
2019-20as vendors of traditional medicine, snake catchers and musicians. Ignorance
about the law is quite common.
The report entitled ‘Biodiversity, Livelihoods and the Law: The Case of
the Jogi-Nath Snake Charmers of India’ based on path-breaking research
was formally released by the Inspector General of Forests, V.K. Bahuguna,
along with a presentation by members of the sapera community in the
Capital on Monday.
“Despite thirty years of the law being in existence, over 70 per cent of the
Jogi-Naths are still dependent on snake charming to earn a livelihood.
Ignorance about the law was quite common. None of them own land, even
though they would like to,’’ said Bahar Dutt, who led this research. Notably,
most of those practising the trade in the current generation are all under
35 years of age.
Trapping occurs throughout the year and during their travels, though
this activity increases during the monsoons. According to the data, each
family on an average collects at least seven snakes.
Most snakes were force-fed and snake husbandry methods and health
were found to be poor. “The snake charmers community council imposes a
heavy fine on a person if the snake dies in his custody as it is considered
an extremely bad omen. As a result, the snakes are released when the
charmers realise that their condition is deteriorating,’’ said Dutt. Their
ambition to showcase the reptiles and earn money was not fulfilled, as
they flouted four WPA provisions, for illegally possessing the animals, not
feeding them properly, causing injuries by extracting teeth unscientifically
and killing snakes for the valuable snake parts and bones. Their offence
generally invites imprisonment for three to seven years and a fine up to
Rs 25,000 in each case.
“On the positive side researchers found that the snake charmers possess
a unique ability to handle venomous snakes with a tremendous knowledge
of the different species and their behaviour. They are also called by local
farmers to retrieve snakes, who would otherwise just kill them, from
agricultural fields or human inhabited areas,’’ she said.
124 / Beehive
2019-20The Snak
Snakee T
Trr ying
Most of us think of snakes as fearsome symbols of death.
But the snake in this poem is itself a victim.
The snake trying
to escape the pursuing stick,
with sudden curvings of thin
long body. How beautiful
and graceful are his shapes!
He glides through the water away
from the stroke. O let him go
over the water
into the reeds to hide
without hurt. Small and green
he is harmless even to children.
Along the sand
he lay until observed
and chased away, and now
he vanishes in the ripples
among the green slim reeds.
W.W.E. ROSS
GLOSSARY
reeds: water or marsh plants with thick stems
Thinking about the Poem
I. 1. What is the snake trying to escape from?
2. Is it a harmful snake? What is its colour?
3. The poet finds the snake beautiful. Find the words he uses to convey its beauty.
4. What does the poet wish for the snake?
5. Where was the snake before anyone saw it and chased it away? Where does
the snake disappear?
2019-20II. 1. Find out as much as you can about different kinds of snakes (from books in
the library, or from the Internet). Are they all poisonous? Find out the names
of some poisonous snakes.
2. Look for information on how to find out whether a snake is harmful.
3. As you know, from the previous lesson you have just read, there are people
in our country who have traditional knowledge about snakes, who even
catch poisonous snakes with practically bare hands. Can you find out
something more about them?
Read and Enjoy
Snakee
Green Snak
Early morning, the day before yesterday,
under a slab of stone,
in a crack,
eyes glittering,
forked tongue licking and flashing,
a frog swelling his belly,
he lay there quietly:
a baby snake, two hands long,
a green snake.
“Poor thing. It’s a green snake. Still a baby.
What harm can it do?” I said.
My father replied,
“A snake’s a snake.”
And mother,
“That’s where everyone walks.
We don’t need trouble. Kill it.”
“I can’t,” I said.
Father struck him with a piece of firewood,
chased him outside,
and killed him flat.
B.R.LAKSHMAN RAO
[translated by A.K. Ramanujan]
126 / Beehive
2019-2010. Kathmandu
BEFORE YOU READ
•Do you like travelling? The writer, Vikram Seth, enjoys it very
much. In his book, Heaven Lake, he describes a long journey
from China to India, via Tibet and Nepal.
•Have you heard of places like Ajmer Sharif, Madurai, Sanchi,
Varanasi, Sarnath, or Halebid? Can you name some other
places like these?
•What do the surroundings of a holy place in your city look
like? Think about it as you read Vikram Seth’s description of
Kathmandu.
1. I GET a cheap room in the centre of town and sleep
for hours. The next morning, with Mr Shah’s son
and nephew, I visit the two temples in Kathmandu
that are most sacred to Hindus and Buddhists.
2. At Pashupatinath (outside which a sign
proclaims ‘Entrance for the Hindus only’) there is
an atmosphere of ‘febrile confusion’. Priests,
hawkers, devotees, tourists, cows, monkeys, pigeons
and dogs roam through the grounds. We offer a few
flowers. There are so many worshippers that some
people trying to get the priest’s attention are elbowed
aside by others pushing their way to the front. A
princess of the Nepalese royal house appears;
everyone bows and makes way. By the main gate, a
party of saf fron-clad Westerners struggle for
permission to enter. The policeman is not convinced
that they are ‘the Hindus’ (only Hindus are allowed
to enter the temple). A fight breaks out between
two monkeys. One chases the other, who jumps
onto a shivalinga, then runs screaming around the
temples and down to the river, the holy Bagmati,
2019-20
proclaim: make
known publicly or
officially
febrile confusion:
hurried activity;
complete chaosPashupatinath Temple, Kathmandu
that flows below. A corpse is being cremated on its
banks; washerwomen are at their work and children
bathe. From a balcony a basket of flowers and
leaves, old offerings now wilted, is dropped into the
river. A small shrine half protrudes from the stone
platform on the river bank. When it emerges fully,
the goddess inside will escape, and the evil period
of the Kaliyug will end on earth.
128 / Beehive
2019-20
shrine: a place of
worship3. At the Baudhnath stupa, the Buddhist shrine of
Kathmandu, there is, in contrast, a sense of
stillness. Its immense white dome is ringed by a
road. Small shops stand on its outer edge: many of
these are owned by Tibetan immigrants; felt bags,
Tibetan prints and silver jewellery can be bought
here. There are no crowds: this is a haven of
quietness in the busy streets around.
4. Kathmandu is vivid, mercenary, religious, with
small shrines to flower-adorned deities along the
narrowest and busiest streets; with fruit sellers,
flute sellers, hawkers of postcards; shops selling
Western cosmetics, film rolls and chocolate; or
copper utensils and Nepalese antiques. Film songs
blare out from the radios, car horns sound, bicycle
bells ring, stray cows low questioningly at
motorcycles, vendors shout out their wares. I indulge
haven: a safe place
The Baudhnath Stupa, Kathmandu
Kathmandu / 129
2019-20myself mindlessly: buy a bar of marzipan, a corn-
on-the-cob roasted in a charcoal brazier on the
pavement (rubbed with salt, chilli powder and
lemon); a couple of love story comics, and even a
Reader’s Digest. All this I wash down with Coca Cola
and a nauseating orange drink, and feel much the
better for it.
5. I consider what route I should take back home. If I
were propelled by enthusiasm for travel per se,
I would go by bus and train to Patna, then sail up
the Ganges past Benaras to Allahabad, then up the
Yamuna, past Agra to Delhi. But I am too exhausted
and homesick; today is the last day of August. Go
home, I tell myself: move directly towards home. I
enter a Nepal Airlines office and buy a ticket for
tomorrow’s flight.
6. I look at the flute seller standing in a corner of the
square near the hotel. In his hand is a pole with
an attachment at the top from which fifty or sixty
bansuris protrude in all directions, like the quills
of a porcupine. They are of bamboo: there are cross-
flutes and recorders. From time to time he stands
the pole on the ground, selects a flute and plays
for a few minutes. The sound rises clearly above
the noise of the traffic and the hawkers’ cries. He
plays slowly, meditatively, without excessive
display. He does not shout out his wares.
Occasionally he makes a sale, but in a curiously
offhanded way as if this were incidental to his
enterprise. Sometimes he breaks off playing to talk
to the fruit seller. I imagine that this has been the
pattern of his life for years.
7. I find it difficult to tear myself away from the square.
Flute music always does this to me: it is at once
the most universal and most particular of sounds.
There is no culture that does not have its flute—
the reed neh, the recorder, the Japanese shakuhachi,
the deep bansuri of Hindustani classical music,
the clear or breathy flutes of South America,
130 / Beehive
2019-20
marzipan: a sweet
made with grated
almond
brazier: open stove
nauseating: sickening
per-se: by itself
meditatively:
thoughtfully
offhanded: casual;
not showing much
interest in somethingthe high-pitched Chinese flutes. Each has its
specific fingering and compass. It weaves its own
associations. Yet to hear any flute is, it seems to
me, to be drawn into the commonality of all
mankind, to be moved by music closest in its
phrases and sentences to the human voice. Its
motive force too is living breath: it too needs to
pause and breathe before it can go on.
8. That I can be so affected by a few familiar phrases
on the bansuri, surprises me at first, for on the
previous occasions that I have returned home after
a long absence abroad, I have hardly noticed such
details, and certainly have not invested them with
the significance I now do.
fingering: way of
placing the fingers to
play different notes
compass: here, range
VIKRAM SETH
[ an extract from Heaven Lake ]
Thinking about the T
Teext
Activity
1. On the following map mark out the route, which the author
thought of but did not take, to Delhi.
Jammu &
Kashmir
Himachal Pradesh
Punjab
Uttaranchal
Haryana
Delhi
Rajasthan
China
Nepal
UP
Kathmandu
Bihar
© Government of India Copyright, 2003
2. Find out the possible routes (by rail, road or air) from
Kathmandu to New Delhi/Mumbai/Kolkata/Chennai.
Kathmandu / 131
2019-20I. Answer these questions in one or two words or in short phrases.
1. Name the two temples the author visited in Kathmandu.
2. The writer says, “All this I wash down with Coca Cola.” What does ‘all this’
refer to?
3. What does Vikram Seth compare to the quills of a porcupine?
4. Name five kinds of flutes.
II. Answer each question in a short paragraph.
1. What difference does the author note between the flute seller and the other
hawkers?
2. What is the belief at Pashupatinath about the end of Kaliyug?
3. The author has drawn powerful images and pictures. Pick out three examples
each of
(i) the atmosphere of ‘febrile confusion’ outside the temple of Pashupatinath
(for example: some people trying to get the priest’s attention are elbowed
aside...)
(ii) the things he sees
(iii) the sounds he hears
III. Answer the following questions in not more than 100 –150 words each.
1. Compare and contrast the atmosphere in and around the Baudhnath shrine
with the Pashupatinath temple.
2. How does the author describe Kathmandu’s busiest streets?
3. “To hear any flute is to be drawn into the commonality of all mankind.” Why
does the author say this?
Thinking about Language
I. Read the following sentences carefully to understand the meaning of the
italicised phrases. Then match the phrasal verbs in Column A with their
meanings in Column B.
1. A communal war broke out when the princess was abducted by the
neighbouring prince.
2. The cockpit broke off from the plane during the plane crash.
3. The car broke down on the way and we were left stranded in the jungle.
4. The dacoit broke away from the police as they took him to court.
5. The brothers broke up after the death of the father.
6. The thief broke into our house when we were away.
132 / Beehive
2019-20A
B
(i) break out(a) to come apart due to force
(ii) break off(b) end a relationship
(iii) break down(c) break and enter illegally; unlawful
trespassing
(iv) break away (from
someone)(d) of start suddenly, (usually a fight,
a war or a disease)
(v) break up(e) to escape from someone’s grip
(vi) break into(f) stop working
II . 1. Use the suffixes -ion or -tion to form nouns from the following verbs. Make
the necessary changes in the spellings of the words.
Example: proclaim – proclamation
cremateactexhaust
inventtemptimmigrate
directmeditateimagine
dislocateassociatededicate
2. Now fill in the blanks with suitable words from the ones that you have formed.
(i) Mass literacy was possible only after the
machine.
of the printing
(ii) Ramesh is unable to tackle the situation as he lacks
(iii) I could not resist the
(iv) Hardwork and
.
to open the letter.
are the main keys to success.
(v) The children were almost fainting with
stand in the sun.
after being made to
III. Punctuation
Use capital letters, full stops, question marks, commas and inverted commas
wherever necessary in the following paragraph.
an arrogant lion was wandering through the jungle one day he asked the
tiger who is stronger than you you O lion replied the tiger who is more fierce
than a leopard asked the lion you sir replied the leopard he marched upto
an elephant and asked the same question the elephant picked him up in
his trunk swung him in the air and threw him down look said the lion there
is no need to get mad just because you don’t know the answer
Kathmandu / 133
2019-20IV. Simple Present Tense
Study these sentences from the lesson.
• A fight breaks out between two monkeys.
• Film songs blare out from the radios.
• I wash it down with Coca-Cola.
The italicised verbs are in the simple present tense. The writer is here describing
what he saw and heard but he uses the present tense instead of the past tense.
A narration or a story can be made more dramatic or immediate by using the
present tense in this way.
Now look at the following sentences.
• A small shrine half protrudes from the stone platform on the riverbank.
• Small shops stand on the outer edge of the Stupa.
We use the simple present tense to speak about what is usually or generally
true. The sentences above describe facts. We also use the simple present tense
in sentences depicting ‘universal truths’. For example:
• The sun rises in the east.
• The earth revolves round the sun.
We can also refer to habitual actions using the simple present tense.
• He usually takes a train instead of a bus to work.
• We often get fine drizzles in winter.
In these sentences words like everyday, often, seldom, never, every month,
generally, usually, etc. may be used.
1. Fill in the blanks with the correct form of the verb in brackets.
(i) The heart is a pump that
(send) the blood circulating
through our body. The pumping action
(take place)
when the left ventricle of the heart
(contract). This
(force) the blood out into the arteries, which
(expand) to receive the oncoming blood.
(ii) The African lungfish can live without water for up to four years. During a
drought it
(dig) a pit and
(enclose)
itself in a capsule of slime and earth, leaving a tiny opening for air. The
capsule
(dry) and
when rain
(harden), but
(come), the mud
(dissolve) and the lungfish
(swim) away.
(iii) MAHESH : We have to organise a class party for our teacher.
(Do) anyone play an instrument?
134 / Beehive
2019-20VIPUL
: Rohit
MAHESH :
VIPUL
(play) the flute.
(Do) he also act?
(compose) music.
: No, he
MAHESH : That’s wonderful!
Speaking
1. Discuss in class the shrines you have visited or know about. Speak about
one of them.
2. Imagine you are giving an eyewitness account or a running commentary of
one of the following:
(i) a game of football, cricket or hockey, or some sports event
(ii) a parade (e.g. Republic Day) or some other national event
Speak a few sentences narrating what you see and hear. Use the simple
present and the present continuous tenses. For example:
• He passes the ball but Ben gets in the way ...
• These brave soldiers guard our frontiers. They display their skills here ...
Writing
Diary entry for a travelogue
I. The text you read is a travelogue where the author, Vikram Seth, talks about
his visit to two sacred places in Kathmandu.
Imagine that you were with Vikram Seth on his visit to Pashupatinath temple,
and you were noting down all that you saw and did there, so that you could
write a travelogue later.
Record in point form
• what you see when you reach the Pashupatinath temple
• what you see happening inside the temple
• what you do when inside the temple
• what you see outside the temple
• what your impressions are about the place.
II. Here is your diary entry when you visited Agra. Read the points and try to write
a travelogue describing your visit to Agra and the Taj Mahal. You may add more
details.
January 2003 — rise before dawn — take the Shatabdi Express at 6.15 a.m.
from Delhi — meet a newly-married couple on train — talk about Himachal
Pradesh — get off the train — enter the once-grand city, Agra — twisted alleys
— traffic dense — rickshaws, cars, people — vendors selling religious artifacts,
plastic toys, spices and sweets — go to the Taj Mahal — constructed entirely of
white marble — magical quality — colour changes with varying of light and
shadow — marble with gemstones inside — reflection of the Taj Mahal in the
pond — school-children, tourists — tourist guides following people.
Kathmandu / 135
2019-20A Slumber Did My Spirit Seal
This poem is about the death of a loved one. How does the
poet feel when he thinks about her death? How does he
imagine her to be, after death?
A slumber did my spirit seal—
I had no human fears.
She seemed a thing that could not feel
The touch of earthly years.
No motion has she now, no force—
She neither hears nor sees,
Rolled round in earth’s diurnal course
With rocks and stones and trees.
WILLIAM WORDSWORTH
GLOSSARY
diurnal: daily (“Earth’s diurnal course” is earth’s daily rotation on its axis.)
Thinking about the Poem
1. “A slumber did my spirit seal,” says the poet. That is, a deep sleep ‘closed
off ’ his soul (or mind). How does the poet react to his loved one’s death? Does
he feel bitter grief ? Or does he feel a great peace?
2. The passing of time will no longer affect her, says the poet. Which lines of
the poem say this?
3. How does the poet imagine her to be, after death? Does he think of her as a
person living in a very happy state (a ‘heaven’)? Or does he see her now as a
part of nature? In which lines of the poem do you find your answer?
2019-20Read and Enjoy
Fear No More
Fear no more the heat o’ the sun,
Nor the furious winter’s rages;
Thou thy worldly task hast done,
Home art gone, and ta’en thy wages:
Golden lads and girls all must,
As chimney-sweepers, come to dust.
Fear no more the frown o’ the great,
Thou art past the tyrant’s stroke;
Care no more to clothe and eat;
To thee the reed is as the oak:
The sceptre, learning, physic, must
All follow this, and come to dust.
Fear no more the lightning-flash,
Nor the all-dreaded thunder-stone;
Fear not slander, censure rash;
Thou hast finished joy and moan:
All lovers young, all lovers must
Consign to thee, and come to dust.
WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE
Theresa Kane says that she likes this poem ... because it is so
exhilarating. It sweeps me along in the splendid, stormy words,
then there is the quiet, peaceful lagoon of the last two lines of each
verse. It is a wonderful poem, as hard, proud and fierce as a rock
in a storm.
[from I Like This Poem, ed. Kaye Webb,
1979, (International Year of the Child),
Puffin Books, p. 154, 14-year-olds]
A Slumber Did My Spirit Seal / 137
2019-20ere YYou
ou
Were
11. If I W
BEFORE YOU READ
•Gerrard lives alone in a lonely cottage. An intruder, who is a
criminal, enters his cottage. He intends to murder Gerrard
and take on his identity. Does he succeed?
•The following words and phrases occur in the play. Do you
know their meanings? Match them with the meanings given,
to find out.
cultured
count on
engaged
melodramatic
to be smart
inflection
wise guy
a dandy bus
tradespeople
gratuitous
dodge
lucky break
Sunday-school teacher
frame
an informal expression for a
fashionable vehicle
unnecessary and usually harmful
exaggerated
sophisticated; well mannered
here, a tone of voice
avoid
an unexpected opportunity for
success
trap
a Christian religious teacher who
teaches on Sundays in Church
(American English) a person who
pretends to know a lot
depend on; rely on
(American English) an informal way
of saying that one is being too clever
occupied; busy
merchants
SCENE: A small cottage interior. There is an entrance back right (which
may be curtained). Another door to the left must be a practical door. The
furniture is simple, consisting of a small table towards the left, a chair or
two, and a divan rather upstage on the right. On the table is a telephone.
2019-20(When the curtain rises Gerrard is standing by the table making a phone
call. He is of medium height, and wearing horn-rimmed glasses . . . He
is dressed in a lounge suit and a great coat. His voice is cultured.)
GERRARD : . .. Well, tell him to phone up directly. I must know . ..
Yes, I expect I’ll still be here, but you mustn’t count on
that ... In about ten minutes’ time. Right-ho. Goodbye.
(He puts down the phone and goes to the divan on the left, where there
is a travelling bag, and starts packing. Whilst he is thus engaged, another
man, similar in build to Gerrard enters from the right silently — revolver
in hand. He is flashily dressed in an overcoat and a soft hat. He bumps
accidentally against the table, and at the sound Gerrard turns quickly.)
GERRARD
INTRUDER:
:
GERRARD:
INTRUDER
GERRARD
INTRUDER:
:
:
(pleasantly) Why, this is a surprise, Mr— er —
I’m glad you’re pleased to see me. I don’t think you’ll be
pleased for long. Put those paws up!
This is all very melodramatic, not very original, perhaps,
but…
Trying to be calm and — er —
‘Nonchalant’ is your word, I think.
Thanks a lot. You’ll soon stop being smart. I’ll make you
crawl. I want to know a few things, see.
You’ll soon stop being smart. I’ll make you crawl.
If I Were You / 139
2019-20GERRARD:
INTRUDER:
GERRARD:
INTRUDER:
GERRARD:
INTRUDER
GERRARD
INTRUDER
GERRARD:
:
:
:
INTRUDER:
GERRARD
INTRUDER
GERRARD
INTRUDER:
:
:
:
GERRARD
INTRUDER:
:
GERRARD:
INTRUDER
GERRARD:
:
INTRUDER:
Anything you like. I know all the answers. But before we
begin I should like to change my position; you may be
comfortable, but I am not.
Sit down there, and no funny business. (Motions to a
chair, and seats himself on the divan by the bag.) Now
then, we’ll have a nice little talk about yourself!
At last a sympathetic audience! I’ll tell you the story of
my life. How as a child I was stolen by the gypsies, and
why at the age of thirty-two, I find myself in my lonely
Essex cottage, how ...
Keep it to yourself, and just answer my questions. You
live here alone? Well, do you?
I’m sorry. I thought you were telling me, not asking me.
A question of inflection; your voice is unfamiliar.
(with emphasis) Do you live here alone?
And if I don’t answer?
You’ve got enough sense not to want to get hurt.
I think good sense is shown more in the ability to avoid
pain than in the mere desire to do so. What do you think,
Mr— er —
Never mind my name. I like yours better, Mr Gerrard.
What are your Christian names?
Vincent Charles.
Do you run a car?
No.
That’s a lie. You’re not dealing with a fool. I’m as smart
as you and smarter, and I know you run a car. Better be
careful, wise guy!
Are you American, or is that merely a clever imitation?
Listen, this gun’s no toy. I can hurt you without killing
you, and still get my answers.
Of course, if you put it like that, I’ll be glad to assist you.
I do possess a car, and it’s in the garage round the corner.
That’s better. Do people often come out here?
Very rarely. Surprisingly few people take the trouble to
visit me. There’s the baker and the greengrocer, of course;
and then there’s the milkman — quite charming, but no
one so interesting as yourself.
I happen to know that you never see tradespeople.
140 / Beehive
2019-20GERRARD:
INTRUDER:
GERRARD:
INTRUDER:
GERRARD:
INTRUDER:
GERRARD:
INTRUDER
GERRARD:
:
INTRUDER
GERRARD
INTRUDER
GERRARD
INTRUDER:
:
:
:
:
GERRARD:
INTRUDER:
GERRARD:
INTRUDER:
GERRARD:
You seem to have taken a considerable amount of trouble.
Since you know so much about me, won’t you say
something about yourself? You have been so modest.
I could tell you plenty. You think you’re smart, but I’m
the top of the class round here. I’ve got brains and I use
them. That’s how I’ve got where I have.
And where precisely have you got? It didn’t require a
great brain to break into my little cottage.
When you know why I’ve broken into your little cottage,
you’ll be surprised, and it won’t be a pleasant surprise.
With you figuring so largely in it, that is understandable.
By the way, what particular line of crime do you embrace,
or aren’t you a specialist?
My speciality’s jewel robbery. Your car will do me a treat.
It’s certainly a dandy bus.
I’m afraid jewels are few and far between in the wilds of
Essex.
So are the cops. I can retire here nicely for a little while.
You mean to live with me? A trifle sudden isn’t it; you’ve
not been invited.
You won’t be here long; so I didn’t trouble to ask.
What do you mean?
This is your big surprise. I’m going to kill you.
A little harsh, isn’t it?
(with heavy sarcasm) Yeah, I’ll be sorry to do it. I’ve taken
a fancy to you, but it’s just got to be done.
Why add murder to your other crimes? It’s a grave step
you’re taking.
I’m not taking it for fun. I’ve been hunted long enough.
I’m wanted for murder already, and they can’t hang me
twice.
You’re planning a gratuitous double, so to speak. Admitted
you’ve nothing to lose, but what have you to gain?
I’ve got freedom to gain. As for myself, I’m a poor hunted
rat. As Vincent Charles Gerrard I’m free to go places and
do nothing. I can eat well and sleep and without having
to be ready to beat it at the sight of a cop.
In most melodramas the villain is foolish enough to delay
his killing long enough to be frustrated. You are much
luckier.
If I Were You / 141
2019-20INTRUDER:
GERRARD
INTRUDER:
:
GERRARD:
INTRUDER
GERRARD:
:
INTRUDER
GERRARD
INTRUDER:
:
:
GERRARD:
INTRUDER
GERRARD
INTRUDER:
:
:
GERRARD
INTRUDER:
:
GERRARD
INTRUDER:
:
GERRARD:
I’m O.K. I’ve got a reason for everything. I’m going to be
Vincent Charles Gerrard, see. I’ve got to know what he
talks like. Now I know. That posh stuff comes easy. This
is Mr V.C. Gerrard speaking. (Pantomime of phoning, in
imitation cultured voice.) And that’s not all. (He stands
up.) Get up a minute (Gerrard stands.) Now take a look at
me.
You’re not particularly decorative.
No! Well, that goes for you, too. I’ve only got to wear
specs and I’ll be enough like you to get away with it.
What about your clothes? They’ll let you down if you’re
not careful.
That’ll be all right. Yours will fit me fine.
That is extremely interesting, but you seem to miss the
point of my remark. I said, you were luckier than most
melodramatic villains. It was not a tribute to your
intelligence. You won’t kill me for a very good reason.
So that’s what you think.
You’ll let me go, and thank God you didn’t shoot sooner.
Come on. What’s on your mind! Better be quick. This
conversation bores me.
Your idea is to elude the police by killing me and taking
on my identity?
Yes, I like the idea.
But are you sure it’s going to help you?
Now listen here. I’ve got this all planned. I did a job in
town. Things went wrong and I killed a cop. Since then
I’ve done nothing but dodge.
And this is where dodging has brought you?
It brought me to Aylesbury. That’s where I saw you in the
car. Two other people saw you and started to talk. I
listened. It looks like you’re a bit queer — kind of a mystery
man.
A mystery which I propose to explain.
(disregarding him) You phone your orders and sometimes
you go away suddenly and come back just the same.
Those are just the things I want to do. Hearing about you
was one of my luckiest breaks.
Apparently you haven’t the intelligence to ask why I am
invested in this cloak of mystery.
142 / Beehive
2019-20INTRUDER:
GERRARD:
INTRUDER
GERRARD:
:
INTRUDER:
GERRARD:
INTRUDER
GERRARD:
:
INTRUDER
GERRARD:
:
INTRUDER:
GERRARD:
(preparing to shoot) As I said before, this conversation
bores me.
Don’t be a fool. If you shoot, you’ll hang for sure. If not as
yourself, then as Vincent Charles Gerrard.
What is this?
This is your big surprise. I said you wouldn’t kill me and
I was right. Why do you think I am here today and gone
tomorrow, never see tradespeople? You say my habits
would suit you. You are a crook. Do you think I am a
Sunday-school teacher?
The game’s up as far as I’m concerned. Things went
wrong with me. I said it with bullets and got away.
Unfortunately they got one of my men, and found things
the fool should have burnt. Tonight I’m expecting trouble.
My bag’s packed ready to clear off. There it is.
It’s a bag all right and
this is a gun all right.
What’s all this?
That’s a disguise outfit;
false moustaches and
what not. Now do you
believe me?
(musingly) I don’t know.
For God’s sake clear
that muddled head of
yours and let’s go.
Come with me in the
car. I can use you. If you
find it’s a frame, you’ve
got me in the car, and
you’ve still got your gun.
May be you’re right.
Then don’t waste time.
(Goes and picks up hat
and bag.)
Careful, boss, I’m
watching you.
I have got a man posted
on the main road. He’ll
Gerrard gives him a push
into the cupboard ...
ring up if he sees the
If I Were You / 143
2019-20INTRUDER
GERRARD:
:
INTRUDER
GERRARD:
:
police, but I don’t want to leave ... (telephone bell rings)
Come on! They’re after us. Through here straight to
the garage.
How do I know that you are telling the truth?
Oh, don’t be a fool. Look for yourself.
(Gerrard opens door and steps away. Intruder leans forward
to inspect it, with his side towards Gerrard, but with the
revolver ready. As he turns his head, Gerrard gives him a
push into the cupboard, knocking the revolver out of his
hand. He slams the door and locks it, picks up the revolver
and goes to the phone, where he stands with the gun pointed
at the cupboard door.)
(rattles door and shouts) Let me out of here!
Hello. Yes, speaking. Sorry I can’t let you have the props
in time for rehearsal, I’ve had a spot of bother — quite
amusing. I think I’ll put it in my next play. Listen, can
you tell our friend the Sergeant to come up here at once?
You’ll probably find him in the Public Bar.
DOUGLAS JAMES
Thinking about the T
Teext
I. Answer these questions.
1. “At last a sympathetic audience.”
(i) Who says this?
(ii) Why does he say it?
(iii) Is he sarcastic or serious?
2. Why does the intruder choose Gerrard as the man whose identity he wants
to take on?
3. “I said it with bullets.”
(i) Who says this?
(ii) What does it mean?
(iii) Is it the truth? What is the speaker’s reason for saying this?
4. What is Gerrard’s profession? Quote the parts of the play that support your
answer.
5. “You’ll soon stop being smart.”
(i) Who says this?
144 / Beehive
2019-20(ii) Why does the speaker say it?
(iii) What according to the speaker will stop Gerrard from being smart?
6. “They can’t hang me twice.”
(i) Who says this?
(ii) Why does the speaker say it?
7. “A mystery I propose to explain.” What is the mystery the speaker proposes
to explain?
8. “This is your big surprise.”
(i) Where has this been said in the play?
(ii) What is the surprise?
Thinking about Language
I. Consult your dictionary and choose the correct word from the pairs given in
brackets.
1. The (site, cite) of the accident was (ghastly/ghostly).
2. Our college (principle/principal) is very strict.
3. I studied (continuously/continually) for eight hours.
4. The fog had an adverse (affect/effect) on the traffic.
5. Cezanne, the famous French painter, was a brilliant (artist/artiste).
6. The book that you gave me yesterday is an extraordinary (collage/college) of
science fiction and mystery.
7. Our school will (host/hoist) an exhibition on cruelty to animals and wildlife
conservation.
8. Screw the lid tightly onto the top of the bottle and (shake/shape) well before
using the contents.
II. Irony is when we say one thing but mean another, usually the opposite of what
we say. When someone makes a mistake and you say, “Oh! that was clever!”,
that is irony. You’re saying ‘clever‘ to mean ‘not clever’.
Expressions we often use in an ironic fashion are:
• Oh, wasn’t that clever!/Oh that was clever!
• You have been a great help, I must say!
• You’ve got yourself into a lovely mess, haven’t you?
• Oh, very funny!/ How funny!
We use a slightly different tone of voice when we use these words ironically.
Read the play carefully and find the words and expressions Gerrard uses in an
ironic way. Then say what these expressions really mean. Two examples have
If I Were You / 145
2019-20been given below. Write down three more such expressions along with what
they really mean.
What the author saysWhat he means
Why, this is a surprise, Mr — er —He pretends that the intruder is a
social visitor whom he is welcoming.
In this way he hides his fear.
At last a sympathetic audience!He pretends that the intruder wants
to listen to him, whereas actually
the intruder wants to find out
information for his own use.
Dictionar
Dictionaryy Use
A word can mean different things in different contexts. Look at these three
sentences:
• The students are taught to respect different cultures.
• The school is organising a cultural show.
• His voice is cultured.
In the first sentence, ‘culture’ (noun) means way of life; in the second, ‘cultural’
(adjective) means connected with art, literature and music; and in the third,
‘cultured’ (verb) means sophisticated, well mannered. Usually a dictionary helps
you identify the right meaning by giving you signposts.
Look at the dictionary entry on ‘culture’ from Oxford Advanced Learner’s
Dictionary, 2005.
146 / Beehive
2019-20(Noun, verb, adjective, adverb, synonyms, etc. are signposts which help you
locate the right meaning and usage, and give information about the part of
speech that the word is.)
Look up the dictionary entries for the words sympathy, familiarity, comfort, care,
and surprise. Use the information given in the dictionary and complete the table.
Noun
Adjective
Adverb
Verb
Meaning
sympathy
familiarity
comfort
care
surprise
Speaking
1. Imagine you are Gerrard. Tell your friend what happened when the Intruder
broke into your house.
[Clues : Describe (i) the intruder — his appearance, the way he spoke, his
plan, his movements, etc., (ii) how you outwitted him.]
2. Enact the play in the class. Pay special attention to words given in italics
before a dialogue. These words will tell you whether the dialogue has to be
said in a happy, sarcastic or ironic tone and how the characters move and
what they do as they speak. Read these carefully before you enact the play.
Writing
I. Which of the words below describe Gerrard and which describe the Intruder?
smarthumorousclever
beautifulcoolconfident
flashywittynonchalant
Write a paragraph each about Gerrard and the Intruder to show what qualities
they have. (You can use some of the words given above.)
II. Convert the play into a story (150 – 200 words). Your story should be as exciting
and as witty as the play. Provide a suitable title to it.
If I Were You / 147
2019-20Constitution of India
Part IV A (Article 51 A)
Fundamental Duties
It shall be the duty of every citizen of India —
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the
National Flag and the National Anthem;
(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle
for freedom;
(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;
(d) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to do
so;
(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all
the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional
diversities; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women;
(f)
to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes,
rivers, wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures;
(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and
reform;
(i)to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;
(j)to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity
so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and
achievement;
*(k) who is a parent or guardian, to provide opportunities for education to his
child or, as the case may be, ward between the age of six and fourteen
years.
Note: The Article 51A containing Fundamental Duties was inserted by the Constitution (42nd
Amendment) Act, 1976 (with effect from 3 January 1977).
*(k) was inserted by the Constitution (86th Amendment) Act, 2002 (with effect from 1 April
2010).
2019-20