2019-20ISBN 81-7450-658-6
First Edition
February 2007
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
Magha 1928
Reprinted
November 2007 Kartika 1929
January 2009 Pausa 1930
December 2009 Agrahayana 1931
November 2010 Kartika 1932
January 2012 Magha 1933
December 2012 Agrahayana 1934
November 2013 Kartika 1935
November 2014 Agrahayana 1936
December 2015 Pausa 1937
February 2017 Phalguna 1938
November 2017 Kartika 1939
December 2018 Agrahayana 1940
PD 500T BS
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2007
qNo part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior
permission of the publisher.
qThis book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of
trade, be lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without
the publisher’s consent, in any form of binding or cover other than
that in which it is published.
qThe correct price of this publication is the price printed on this
page, Any revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker
or by any other means is incorrect and should be unacceptable.
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New Delhi 110 016Phone : 011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014Phone : 079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114Phone : 033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021Phone : 0361-2674869
Publication Team
` 80.00
Printed on 80 GSM paper with
NCERT watermark
Published at the Publication Division
by the Secretary, National Council of
Educational Research and Training,
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016
and printed at Laxmi Print India,
519/1/23, Sansar Compound, Dilshad
Garden Industrial Area, Shahdara,
Delhi -110 095
2019-20
Head, Publication
Division: M. Siraj Anwar
Chief Editor: Shveta Uppal
Chief Business
Manager: Gautam Ganguly
Chief Production
Officer: Arun Chitkara
Editor: Vijayam
Sankaranarayanan
Production Assistant : Om Prakash
Cover, Layout and Illustrations
Nidhi WadhwaForeword
T HE National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005,
recommends that children’s life at school must be linked
to their life outside the school. This principle marks a
departure from the legacy of bookish learning which
continues to shape our system and causes a gap between
the school, home and community. The syllabi and
textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt
to implement this basic idea. They also attempt to
discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp
boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these
measures will take us significantly further in the direction
of a child-centered system of education outlined in the
National Policy of Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that
school principals and teachers will take to encourage
children to reflect on their own learning and to pursue
imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise
that, given space, time and freedom, children generate new
knowledge by engaging with the information passed on to
them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as the
sole basis of examination is one of the key reasons why
other resources and sites of learning are ignored.
Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive
and treat children as participants in learning, not as
receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school
routines and mode of functioning. Flexibility in the daily
time-table is as necessary as rigour in implementing the
annual calendar so that the required number of teaching
days are actually devoted to teaching. The methods used
for teaching and evaluation will also determine how effective
this textbook proves for making children’s life at school a
happy experience, rather than a source of stress or
boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address the
problem of curricular burden by restructuring and
reorienting knowledge at different stages with greater
2019-20consideration for child psychology and the time available
for teaching. The textbook attempts to enhance this
endeavour by giving higher priority and space to
opportunities for contemplation and wondering,
discussion in small groups, and activities requiring
hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and
Training (NCERT) appreciates the hard work done by the
textbook development committee responsible for this book.
We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory group
in languages, Professor Namwar Singh, and the Chief
Advisor for this book, Professor R. Amritavalli, for guiding
the work of this committee. Several teachers contributed
to the development of this textbook; we are grateful to their
principals for making this possible. We are indebted to the
institutions and organisations which have generously
permitted us to draw upon their resources, materials and
personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of
the National Monitoring Committee, appointed by the
Department of Secondary and Higher Education,
Ministry of Human Resource Development under the
Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri and
Professor G.P. Deshpande for their valuable time
and contribution. As an organisation committed to
systemic reform and continuous improvement in the
quality of its products, NCERT welcomes comments and
suggestions which will enable us to undertake further
revision and refinements.
New Delhi
20 November 2006
iv
2019-20
Director
National Council of Educational
Research and TrainingTo the Teacher
First Flight, a textbook in English for Class X, is based
on the new syllabus in English which was prepared as
a follow-up to the National Curriculum Framework,
2005. The English curriculum lays emphasis on
providing a variety of rich, comprehensible inputs to
learners to enable their engagement in learning; and
on recognising the multilinguality of everyday
experience in India. This textbook aims at helping the
learner to read for meaning in context, thus providing
a bank of language to serve as a base for
communication in English.
• This book presents you with texts in a variety of
genres, including the diary, the formal address, the
travelogue, and the play, on literary, cultural and
sociological themes that touch upon aspects of life
relevant to adolescents. Questions and ideas about
the individual and society, the understanding and
management of one’s emotions, and of one’s place
in a larger time and space, are here presented both
by such voices from contemporary history as Nelson
Mandela and Anne Frank, and in fiction from India
and abroad, chosen for their enduring value. There
are units that present glimpses of our country, and
depict our relationship with the natural world.
• The units in the book have been loosely structured
in the following way. An introductory section, Before
You Read, gives information or activates knowledge
about the text to be read, and suggests some warm-
up activities. Let children participate in these to the
fullest extent; where necessary or possible, add some
activities of your own.
• An innovation made in consultation with teachers is a
while-reading activity, the Oral Comprehension Check,
which aims at a quick, ongoing check that learners are
indeed following the text up to that point, so that they
can progress meaningfully to the parts of the text that
2019-20follow. Let learners briefly share their understanding by
orally answering the questions in this section.
Reflection, expression of individual opinion and deeper
understanding of the text can occur later, when the text
has been read and understood in its totality, in the section
Thinking about the Text. The questions in the latter
section are designed to enable the learner to move from
factual understanding to critical thinking.
• Thinking about Language provides exercises or tasks
that follow naturally from the contexts suggested by a
particular unit, for enrichment of vocabulary and other
language skills. Exploit them well and also create your
own activities. Exercises for the communicative skills of
listening, speaking, and writing have been given in
contexts that support group or pair activity. A variety of
writing tasks have been aimed at.
• While dealing with poems, let children understand and
enjoy the theme and the language by reading a poem with
close attention, more than once, silently or along with the
teacher or a partner. Where some information has been
provided about the poet or the background to the poem,
this should not stand in the way of the learner accessing
the poem directly, and attempting to make sense of it.
How do we read poetry? Here is what one teacher says.
All poetry requires patience. Be patient with the text;
read carefully for nuance and inference. Know what the
words mean. Look up words that are unfamiliar — look
up words that are familiar but you cannot specify. Pay
attention to words or phrases that resonate with other
things you know and try to identify the connection. Be
patient and read slowly, and you will be amply rewarded.
• Each unit includes some guidelines for your assistance,
under the head In This Lesson, organised under two
subsections — What We Have Done, and What You Can
Do. The first subsection summarises the theme of the unit,
and/or its activities. The second suggests interesting
possibilities for you to go beyond the text, using the text as
a springboard for a variety of language activities appropriate
to your particular group of learners. Suggested here, for
example, are group activities for speaking or making a ticket
collage, as well as dictation. As you follow these suggestions
and take these activities forward along your own lines, you
will be able to enrich your students’ learning.
vi
2019-20Textbook Development Committee
CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY GROUP IN LANGUAGES
Professor Namwar Singh, formerly Chairman, School of
Languages, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
CHIEF ADVISOR
R. Amritavalli, Professor, Central Institute of English and
Foreign Languages (CIEFL), Hyderabad
CHIEF COORDINATOR
Ram Janma Sharma, Professor and Head, Department
of Languages, NCERT, New Delhi
MEMBERS
Kalyani Samantray, Reader, SBW College, Cuttack
Kirti Kapur, Lecturer, Department of Languages, NCERT,
New Delhi
Lakshmi Rawat, TGT, BRD Sarvodaya Kanya Vidyalaya,
Prasad Nagar, Karol Bagh, New Delhi
Nasiruddin Khan, Reader, Department of Languages
NCERT, New Delhi
Padmini Baruah, Reader, Department of ELT, Guwahati
University, Guwahati
Sadhana Agarwal, TGT, SKV Dayanand School,
Daryaganj, Delhi
Sadhana Parashar, Education Officer (ELT), CBSE,
Community Centre, Preet Vihar, Delhi
Sandhya Sahoo, Reader, Regional Institute of Education
(NCERT), Bhubaneswar
Shruti Sircar, Lecturer, Centre for ESL Studies, CIEFL,
Hyberabad
MEMBER –COORDINATOR
R. Meganathan, Lecturer, Department of Languages,
NCERT, New Delhi
2019-20Acknowledgements
THE National Council of Educational Research and Training is
grateful to Professor M.L. Tickoo, formerly of the CIEFL,
Hyderabad and the Regional Language Centre, Singapore;
Professor Jayasheelan formerly of the CIEFL, Hyderabad; and
Professor Rajiv Krishnan of the CIEFL, Hyderabad, for their
valuable suggestions and advice in the development of this book.
We thank Dr Shyamla Kumaradoss for developing the
teacher’s guidelines for each unit so as to maximise learning.
For permission to reproduce copyright material in this
book, NCERT would like to thank the following: Sahitya
Akademi for ‘A Baker from Goa’ by Lucio Rodrigues from
Modern Indian Literature: An Anthology, (Volume Three — Plays
and Prose); Media Transasia India Limited, New Delhi, for
‘Coorg’ and the accompanying photographs by Lokesh Abrol;
Little Brown and Company, London, for the extract ‘Nelson
Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom’ from Long Walk to Freedom:
The Autobiography of Nelson Mandela; National Book Trust,
India, New Delhi, for ‘Madam Rides the Bus’ by
Vallikannan and for ‘Tea from Assam’ from Story of Tea by
Arup Kumar Dutta; R. K. Laxman for the illustrations in
‘Madam Rides the Bus’; Macmillan Publishing Company, New
York, for ‘The Ball Poem’ by John Berryman and for ‘Fire and
Ice’ and ‘Dust of Snow’ by Robert Frost from the Anthology of
American Literature II : Realism to the Present (Third Edition);
Puffin Books, London, for ‘From the Diary of Anne Frank’, an
extract from The Diary of a Young Girl’; Longmans for the
extract, ‘Mijbil the Otter’ from Ring of Bright Water; Random
House, New York, for the poem ‘The Panther’ by Rainer Maria
Rilke, edited and translated by Stephen Mitchell; Amitai
Etzioni, George Washington University, for the text ‘Good Grief’;
Holt, Rinehard and Winston Inc., New York, for the text ‘The
Sermon at Benares’ by Betty Renshaw.
Special thanks are also due to the Publication
Department, NCERT, for their support. NCERT gratefully
acknowledges the contributions made by Neena Chandra,
Copy Editor; Mohammed Harun and Arvind Sharma,
DTP Operators; Parash Ram, Incharge, Computer Resource
Centre, NCERT; and Mathew John, Proof Reader.
2019-20Contents
Forewordiii
To the Teacherv
1. A Letter to God
G.L.FUENTES1
Dust of Snow
ROBERT FROST14
Fire and Ice
ROBERT FROST15
2. Nelson Mandela : Long Walk to Freedom
NELSON ROLIHLAHLA MANDELA
A Tiger in the Zoo
LESLIE NORRIS
16
29
3. Two Stories about Flying
I. His First Flight
LIAM O’ FLAHERTY
32
II. Black Aeroplane
FREDERICK FORSYTH
How to Tell Wild Animals
CAROLYN WELLS43
The Ball Poem
JOHN BERRYMAN46
4. From the Diary of Anne Frank
ANNE FRANK
Amanda!
ROBIN KLEIN
48
61
5. The Hundred Dresses –I
EL BSOR ESTER
63
2019-206. The Hundred Dresses–II
EL BSOR ESTER
Animals
WALT WHITMAN
73
83
7. Glimpses of India
I. A Baker from Goa
LUCIO RODRIGUES
85
II. Coorg
LOKESH ABROL
III. Tea from Assam
ARUP KUMAR DATTA
The Trees
ADRIENNE RICH99
8. Mijbil the Otter
GAVIN MAXWELL102
Fog
CARL SANDBURG115
9. Madam Rides the Bus
VALLIKKANNAN
The Tale of Custard the Dragon
OGDEN NASH
116
129
10. The Sermon at Benares133
For Anne Gregory
WILLIAM BUTLER YEATS140
11. The Proposal
ANTON CHEKOV
142
x
2019-20BEFORE YOU READ
They say faith can move mountains. But what should we put our
faith in? This is the question this story delicately poses.
Lencho is a farmer who writes a letter to God when his crops
are ruined, asking for a hundred pesos. Does Lencho’s letter reach
God? Does God send him the money? Think what your answers to
these questions would be, and guess how the story continues, before
you begin to read it.
Activity
1. One of the cheapest ways to send money to someone is through
the post office. Have you ever sent or received money in this
way? Here’s what you have to do. (As you read the instructions,
discuss with your teacher in class the meanings of these words:
counter, counter clerk, appropriate, acknowledgement, counterfoil,
record. Consult a dictionary if necessary. Are there words
corresponding to these English words in your languages?)
2019-20First Flight
2. Fill out the Money Order form given below using the clues that
follow the form.
2
2019-20• Think about who you will send the money to, and how much.
You might want to send money for a magazine subscription,
or to a relative or a friend.
• Or you may fill out the form with yourself as sender and your
partner as receiver. Use a part of your pocket money, and
submit the form at the nearest post office to see how it’s done.
See how your partner enjoys getting money by post!
• Notice that the form has three parts — the Money Order form,
the part for official use and the Acknowledgement. What would
you write in the ‘Space for Communication’?
Now complete the following statements.
(i) In addition to the sender, the form has to be signed by the
(ii) The ‘Acknowledgement’ section of the form is sent back by
after the
the post office to the
signs it.
(iii) The ‘Space for Communication’ section is used for
(iv) The form has six sections. The sender needs to fill
out
3
sections and the receiver
2019-20
A Letter to God
THE house — the only one in the entire valley — sat
on the crest of a low hill. From this height one crest
could see the river and the field of ripe corn dotted top of a hill
with the flowers that always promised a good
harvest. The only thing the earth needed was a
downpour or at least a shower. Throughout the
morning Lencho — who knew his fields intimately
— had done nothing else but see the sky towards
the north-east.
“Now we’re really going to get some water, woman.”
The woman who was preparing supper, replied,
“Yes, God willing”. The older boys were working in
the field, while the smaller ones were playing near
the house until the woman called to them all, “Come
for dinner”. It was during the meal that, just asFirst Flight
4
Lencho had predicted, big drops of rain began to
fall. In the north-east huge mountains of clouds
could be seen approaching. The air was fresh and
sweet. The man went out for no other reason than
to have the pleasure of feeling the rain on his body,
and when he returned he exclaimed, ‘‘These aren’t
raindrops falling from the sky, they are new coins.
The big drops are ten cent pieces and the little ones
are fives.’’
With a satisfied expression he regarded the field
of ripe corn with its flowers, draped in a curtain of
rain. But suddenly a strong wind began to blow
and along with the rain very large hailstones began
to fall. These truly did resemble new silver coins.
The boys, exposing themselves to the rain, ran out
to collect the frozen pearls.
‘‘It’s really getting bad now,’’ exclaimed the man.
“I hope it passes quickly.” It did not pass quickly.
For an hour the hail rained on the house, the
garden, the hillside, the cornfield, on the whole
valley. The field was white, as if covered with salt.
Not a leaf remained on the trees. The corn was
totally destroyed. The flowers were gone from the
plants. Lencho’s soul was filled with sadness. When
the storm had passed, he stood in the middle of the
field and said to his sons, “A plague of locusts would
2019-20
draped
covered (with cloth)
locusts
insects which fly in
big swarms (groups)
and destroy cropshave left more than this. The hail has left nothing.
This year we will have no corn.’’
That night was a sorrowful one.
“All our work, for nothing.”
‘‘There’s no one who can help us.”
“We’ll all go hungry this year.”
Oral Comprehension Check
1. What did Lencho hope for?
2. Why did Lencho say the raindrops were like ‘new coins’?
3. How did the rain change? What happened to Lencho’s fields?
4. What were Lencho’s feelings when the hail stopped?
2019-20
5
conscience
an inner sense of
right and wrong
peso
currency of several
Latin American
countries
amiable
friendly and
pleasant
A Letter to God
But in the hearts of all who lived in that solitary
house in the middle of the valley, there was a single
hope: help from God.
“Don’t be so upset, even though this seems like
a total loss. Remember, no one dies of hunger.”
“That’s what they say: no one dies of hunger.”
All through the night, Lencho thought only of
his one hope: the help of God, whose eyes, as he
had been instructed, see everything, even what is
deep in one’s conscience. Lencho was an ox of a
man, working like an animal in the fields, but still
he knew how to write. The following Sunday, at
daybreak, he began to write a letter which he
himself would carry to town and place in the mail.
It was nothing less than a letter to God.
“God,” he wrote, “if you don’t help me, my family
and I will go hungry this year. I need a hundred
pesos in order to sow my field again and to live
until the crop comes, because the hailstorm... .”
He wrote ‘To God’ on the envelope, put the letter
inside and, still troubled, went to town. At the post
office, he placed a stamp on the letter and dropped
it into the mailbox.
One of the employees, who was a postman and
also helped at the post office, went to his boss
laughing heartily and showed him the letter to God.
Never in his career as a postman had he known
that address. The postmaster — a fat, amiableFirst Flight
6
fellow — also broke out laughing, but almost
immediately he turned serious and, tapping the
letter on his desk, commented, “What faith! I wish I
had the faith of the man who wrote this letter.
Starting up a correspondence with God!”
So, in order not to shake the writer’s faith in God,
the postmaster came up with an idea: answer the
letter. But when he opened it, it was evident that to
answer it he needed something more than goodwill,
ink and paper. But he stuck to his resolution: he
asked for money from his employees, he himself gave
part of his salary, and several friends of his were
obliged to give something ‘for an act of charity’.
It was impossible for him to gather together the
hundred pesos, so he was able to send the farmer
only a little more than half. He put the money in an
envelope addressed to Lencho and with it a letter
containing only a single word as a signature: God.
Oral Comprehension Check
1. Who or what did Lencho have faith in? What did he do?
2. Who read the letter?
3. What did the postmaster do then?
The following Sunday Lencho came a bit earlier
than usual to ask if there was a letter for him.
It was the postman himself who handed the letter
to him while the postmaster, experiencing the
contentment of a man who has performed a good contentment
satisfaction
deed, looked on from his office.
Lencho showed not the slightest surprise on
seeing the money; such was his confidence — but
he became angry when he counted the money. God
could not have made a mistake, nor could he have
denied Lencho what he had requested.
Immediately, Lencho went up to the window to
ask for paper and ink. On the public writing-table,
he started to write, with much wrinkling of his brow,
caused by the effort he had to make to express his
ideas. When he finished, he went to the window to
buy a stamp which he licked and then affixed to
2019-20the envelope with a blow of his fist. The moment
the letter fell into the mailbox the postmaster went
to open it. It said: “God: Of the money that I asked
for, only seventy pesos reached me. Send me the
rest, since I need it very much. But don’t send it to
me through the mail because the post office
employees are a bunch of crooks. Lencho.”
1. Who does Lencho have complete faith in? Which sentences in the story tell
you this?
2. Why does the postmaster send money to Lencho? Why does he sign the
letter ‘God’?
3. Did Lencho try to find out who had sent the money to him? Why/Why not?
4. Who does Lencho think has taken the rest of the money? What is the irony
in the situation? (Remember that the irony of a situation is an unexpected
aspect of it. An ironic situation is strange or amusing because it is the
opposite of what is expected.)
2019-20
A Letter to God
Oral Comprehension Check
1. Was Lencho surprised to find a letter for him with money in it?
2. What made him angry?
75. Are there people like Lencho in the real world? What kind of a person would you
say he is? You may select appropriate words from the box to answer the question.
greedy
selfish
naive
stupid
comical
ungrateful
unquestioning
6. There are two kinds of conflict in the story: between humans and nature,
and between humans themselves. How are these conflicts illustrated?
I. Look at the following sentence from the story.
Suddenly a strong wind began to blow and along with the rain very large
hailstones began to fall.
First Flight
‘Hailstones’ are small balls of ice that fall like rain. A storm in which
hailstones fall is a ‘hailstorm’. You know that a storm is bad weather with
strong winds, rain, thunder and lightning.
There are different names in different parts of the world for storms,
depending on their nature. Can you match the names in the box with
their descriptions below, and fill in the blanks? You may use a dictionary
to help you.
gale,
whirlwind,
hurricane,
8
tornado,
cyclone,
typhoon
1. A violent tropical storm in which strong winds move in a circle:
__ __ c __ __ __ __
2. An extremely strong wind : __ a __ __
3. A violent tropical storm with very strong winds : __ __ p __ __ __ __
4. A violent storm whose centre is a cloud in the shape of a funnel:
__ __ __ n __ __ __
5. A violent storm with very strong winds, especially in the western Atlantic
Ocean: __ __ r __ __ __ __ __ __
6. A very strong wind that moves very fast in a spinning movement and
causes a lot of damage: __ __ __ __ l __ __ __ __
II. Notice how the word ‘hope’ is used in these sentences from the story:
(a) I hope it (the hailstorm) passes quickly.
(b) There was a single hope: help from God.
In the first example, ‘hope’ is a verb which means you wish for something to
happen. In the second example it is a noun meaning a chance for something
to happen.
2019-20Match the sentences in Column A with the meanings of ‘hope’ in Column B.
AB
1. Will you get the subjects you want
to study in college?
I hope so.– a feeling that something good will
probably happen
2. I hope you don’t mind my saying
this, but I don’t like the way you
are arguing.
– thinking that this would happen
(It may or may not have happened.)
– stopped believing that this good
thing would happen
3. This discovery will give new hope
to HIV/AIDS sufferers.– wanting something to happen
(and thinking it quite possible)
4. We were hoping against hope that
the judges would not notice our
mistakes.– showing concern that what you
say should not offend or disturb
the other person: a way of being
polite
5. I called early in the hope of
speaking to her before she went
to school.
– wishing for something to happen,
although this is very unlikely
6. Just when everybody had given up
hope, the fishermen came back,
seven days after the cyclone.
III. Relative Clauses
9
Look at these sentences
(a) All morning Lencho — who knew his fields intimately — looked at
the sky.
(b) The woman, who was preparing supper, replied, “Yes, God willing.’’
The relative clauses in (a) and (b) above are called non-defining, because
we already know the identity of the person they describe. Lencho is a
particular person, and there is a particular woman he speaks to. We don’t
need the information in the relative clause to pick these people out from a
larger set.
A non-defining relative clause usually has a comma in front of it and a
comma after it (some writers use a dash (—) instead, as in the story). If the
relative clause comes at the end, we just put a full stop.
Join the sentences given below using who, whom, whose, which, as
suggested.
1. I often go to Mumbai. Mumbai is the commercial capital of India. (which)
2. My mother is going to host a TV show on cooking. She cooks very
well. (who)
2019-20
A Letter to God
The italicised parts of the sentences give us more information about Lencho
and the woman. We call them relative clauses. Notice that they begin with
a relative pronoun who. Other common relative pronouns are whom, whose,
and which.3. These sportspersons are going to meet the President. Their performance
has been excellent. (whose)
4. Lencho prayed to God. His eyes see into our minds. (whose)
5. This man cheated me. I trusted him. (whom)
Sometimes the relative pronoun in a relative clause remains ‘hidden’. For
example, look at the first sentence of the story:
(a) The house — the only one in the entire valley — sat on the crest of a
low hill.
We can rewrite this sentence as:
(b) The house — which was the only one in the entire valley — sat on
the crest of a low hill.
In (a), the relative pronoun which and the verb was are not present.
First Flight
IV. Using Negatives for Emphasis
10
We know that sentences with words such as no, not or nothing show the
absence of something, or contradict something. For example:
(a) This year we will have no corn. (Corn will be absent)
(b) The hail has left nothing. (Absence of a crop)
(c) These aren’t raindrops falling from the sky, they are new coins.
(Contradicts the common idea of what the drops of water falling from
the sky are)
But sometims negative words are used just to emphasise an idea. Look at
these sentences from the story:
(d) Lencho…had done nothing else but see the sky towards the north-
east. (He had done only this)
(e) The man went out for no other reason than to have the pleasure of
feeling the rain on his body. (He had only this reason)
(f) Lencho showed not the slightest surprise on seeing the money.
(He showed no surprise at all)
Now look back at example (c). Notice that the contradiction in fact serves to
emphasise the value or usefulness of the rain to the farmer.
Find sentences in the story with negative words, which express the
following ideas emphatically.
1. The trees lost all their leaves.
2. The letter was addressed to God himself.
3. The postman saw this address for the first time in his career.
2019-20V. Metaphors
The word metaphor comes from a Greek word meaning ‘transfer’. Metaphors
compare two things or ideas: a quality or feature of one thing is transferred
to another thing. Some common metaphors are
• the leg of the table: The leg supports our body. So the object that supports
a table is described as a leg.
• the heart of the city: The heart is an important organ in the centre of our
body. So this word is used to describe the central area of a city.
In pairs, find metaphors from the story to complete the table below. Try
to say what qualities are being compared. One has been done for you.
ObjectMetaphor
CloudHuge mountains
of clouds
Quality or Feature Compared
The mass or ‘hugeness’
of mountains
Raindrops
Hailstones
11
Locusts
An ox of a man
Have you ever been in great difficulty, and felt that only a miracle could
help you? How was your problem solved? Speak about this in class with
your teacher.
2019-20
A Letter to God
An epidemic (a disease)
that spreads very rapidly
and leaves many people deadListen to the letter (given under ‘In This Lesson’) read out by your teacher/on
the audio tape. As you listen fill in the table given below.
The writer apologises (says sorry)
because
The writer has sent this to
the reader
The writer sent it in the
month of
First Flight
The reason for not writing
earlier
12
Sarah goes to
Who is writing to whom?
Where and when were they
last together?
Lencho suffered first due to drought and then by floods. Our country is also facing
such situations in the recent years. There is flood and there is drought. There is
a need to save water through water harvesting. Design a poster for your area on
how to save water during summer and when it is available in excess.
WHAT WE HAVE DONE
• Introduced students to the story that they are going to read.
• Related a thought-provoking story about the nature of belief.
• Helped students, through an interesting activity, to understand something that
happens in the story — how to send money using a money order.
• Guided them through the reading activity by providing periodic comprehension checks
as they read, and checked for holistic understanding at the end of the reading activity.
• Provided interesting exercises to strengthen students’ grasp of the specific vocabulary
found in the story, and also introduced them to related vocabulary.
2019-20• Explained specific areas of grammar — non-defining relative clauses and the use of
negatives for emphasis — providing illustrations from the text, and exercises for practice.
• Explained what metaphors are, and helped students identify metaphors in the text
by providing clues.
• Provided a context for authentic speaking.
• Provided an interesting listening activity.
Given below is the passage for listening activity
Bhatt House
256, Circuit Road
Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India
25 January 2006
Dear Arti,
How are you? I’m sorry I haven’t written for a very long time. I think I last
sent you a birthday card in the month of September 2005.
We have just moved house (see our new address above). This is our new
home. Sarah has just about started going to school. We have admitted her to
‘Little Feet’ as this is very close to our new home.
I’m sitting here by the window sill, writing to you. There is a slight drizzle outside
and I’m reminded of the good times we had together at Bangalore last year.
Do write back. Love,
Jaya
13
WHAT YOU CAN D O
Before You Read : Encourage students to share their ideas about what will happen in the
story.
Activity : Before filling out the form, get the students to read through the form and
decide which parts they should fill out, and which parts will be filled in by the postal
department. Ask a few students to volunteer to actually send a money order (the
amount need not be large) and share the experience with the rest of the class.
Grammar: After they have done the exercise, ask students to make their own sentences
with non-defining relative clauses — for example, ‘Meena, who’s a very clever girl, is
always first in class.’ Or, ‘Our gardener, who knows a lot about plants, loves to talk
about them.’
Speaking: Take the first turn — talk to the students about an instance from your own
life, or from that of someone you know.
2019-20
A Letter to God
Reading: Break the text up into manageable chunks for reading (three paragraphs, for
example), and encourage students to read silently, on their own. Give them enough
time to read, and then discuss what they have read before going on to the next portion.
Use the ‘Oral Comprehension Checks’ in the appropriate places, and use the ‘Thinking
about the Text’ questions at the end of the passage to help them go beyond the text.Dust of Sno
w
Snow
The way a crow
Shook down on me
The dust of snow
From a hemlock tree
Has given my heart
A change of mood
And saved some part
Of a day I had rued.
ROBERT FROST
hemlock: A poisonous plant (tree) with small white flowers
rued: held in regret
This poem presents a moment that seems simple, but has a larger significance.
[Compare this other quotation from Robert Frost: “Always, always a larger
significance... A little thing touches a larger thing.”)
1. What is a “dust of snow”? What does the poet say has changed his mood?
How has the poet’s mood changed?
2. How does Frost present nature in this poem? The following questions may
help you to think of an answer.
(i) What are the birds that are usually named in poems? Do you think a
crow is often mentioned in poems? What images come to your mind
when you think of a crow?
(ii) Again, what is “a hemlock tree”? Why doesn’t the poet write about a
more ‘beautiful’ tree such as a maple, or an oak, or a pine?
(iii) What do the ‘crow’ and ‘hemlock’ represent — joy or sorrow? What does
the dust of snow that the crow shakes off a hemlock tree stand for?
3. Have there been times when you felt depressed or hopeless? Have you
experienced a similar moment that changed your mood that day?
2019-20Fire and Ice
Some say the world will end in fire
Some say in ice.
From what I’ve tasted of desire
I hold with those who favour fire.
But if it had to perish twice,
I think I know enough of hate
To say that for destruction ice
Is also great
And would suffice.
ROBERT FROST
perish: die
suffice: be sufficient
1. There are many ideas about how the world will ‘end’. Do you think the world
will end some day? Have you ever thought what would happen if the sun got
so hot that it ‘burst’, or grew colder and colder?
2. For Frost, what do ‘fire’ and ‘ice’ stand for? Here are some ideas:
greedavaricecrueltylust
conflictfuryintolerancerigidity
insensitivitycoldnessindifferencehatred
3. What is the rhyme scheme of the poem? How does it help in bringing out the
contrasting ideas in the poem?
2019-20BEFORE YOU READ
• ‘Apartheid’ is a political system that separates people according
to their race. Can you say which of the three countries named
below had such a political system until very recently?
(i) United States of America
(ii) South Africa
(iii) Australia
• Have you heard of Nelson Mandela? Mandela, and his African
National Congress, spent a lifetime fighting against apartheid.
Mandela had to spend thirty years in prison. Finally, democratic
elections were held in South Africa in 1994, and Mandela became
the first black President of a new nation.
In this extract from his autobiography, Long Walk to Freedom,
Mandela speaks about a historic occasion, ‘the inauguration’. Can
you guess what the occasion might be? Check your guess with
this news item (from the BBC) of 10 May 1994.
Mandela Becomes South Africa’s First Black President
Nelson Mandela has become South Africa’s first Black
President after more than three centuries of White rule.
Mr Mandela’s African National Congress (ANC) party won
252 of the 400 seats in the first democratic elections of South
Africa’s history.
The inauguration ceremony took place in the Union
Buildings amphitheatre in Pretoria today, attended by
politicians and dignitaries from more than 140 countries
around the world. “Never, never again will this beautiful land
experience the oppression of one by another, ” said Nelson
Mandela in his address.
… Jubilant scenes on the streets of Pretoria followed the
ceremony with blacks, whites and coloureds celebrating
together... More than 100,000 South African men, women
and children of all races sang and danced with joy.
2019-20Activity
In Column A are some expressions you will find in the text. Make
a guess and match each expression with an appropriate meaning
from Column B.
AB
(i) A rainbow
gathering of
different colours
and nations
(ii) The seat of white
supremacy– A great ability (almost
unimaginable) to remain
unchanged by suffering (not losing
hope, goodness or courage)
– A half-secret life, like a life lived in
the fading light between sunset
and darkness
(iii) Be overwhelmed
with a sense of
history
(iv) Resilience that
defies the
imagination
(v) A glimmer of
humanity
(vi) A twilight
existence
– A sign of human feeling (goodness,
kindness, pity, justice, etc.)
– A beautiful coming together of
various peoples, like the colours in
a rainbow
– The centre of racial superiority
– Feel deeply emotional,
remembering and understanding
all the past events that have led
up to the moment
2019-20
(to be) besieged by
to be surrounded
closely by
amphitheatre
a building without a
roof, with many
rows of seats rising
in steps (typical of
ancient Greece and
Rome)
Nelson Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom
TENTH May dawned bright and clear. For the past
few days I had been pleasantly besieged by
dignitaries and world leaders who were coming to
pay their respects before the inauguration. The
inauguration would be the largest gathering ever of
international leaders on South African soil.
The ceremonies took place in the lovely
sandstone amphitheatre formed by the Union
Buildings in Pretoria. For decades this had been
the seat of white supremacy, and now it was the
site of a rainbow gathering of different colours and
nations for the installation of South Africa’s first
democratic, non-racial government.
On that lovely autumn day I was accompanied
by my daughter Zenani. On the podium, Mr de Klerk
was first sworn in as second deputy president. Then
17First Flight
Thabo Mbeki was sworn in as first deputy president.
When it was my turn, I pledged to obey and uphold
the Constitution and to devote myself to the well-
being of the Republic and its people. To the
assembled guests and the watching world, I said:
18
Today, all of us do, by our presence here... confer glory
and hope to newborn liberty. Out of the experience of
an extraordinary human disaster that lasted too long,
must be born a society of which all humanity will
be proud.
We, who were outlaws not so long ago, have today
been given the rare privilege to be host to the nations of
the world on our own soil. We thank all of our
distinguished international guests for having come to
take possession with the people of our country of what
is, after all, a common victory for justice, for peace, for
human dignity.
We have, at last, achieved our political emancipation.
We pledge ourselves to liberate all our people from the
continuing bondage of poverty, deprivation, suffering,
gender and other discrimination.
Never, never, and never again shall it be that this
beautiful land will again experience the oppression of one
by another.
The sun shall never set on so glorious a human
achievement.
Let freedom reign. God bless Africa!
confer (a formal
word)
here, give
We, who were
outlaws
because of its policy
of apartheid, many
countries had earlier
broken off diplomatic
relations with South
Africa
emancipation
freedom from
restriction
deprivation
state of not having
one's rightful benefits
discrimination
being treated
differently or
unfavourably
Oral Comprehension Check
1. Where did the ceremonies take place? Can you name any public
buildings in India that are made of sandstone?
2. Can you say how 10 May is an ‘autumn day’ in South Africa?
2019-203. At the beginning of his speech, Mandela mentions “an extraordinary
human disaster”. What does he mean by this? What is the “glorious …
human achievement” he speaks of at the end?
4. What does Mandela thank the international leaders for?
5. What ideals does he set out for the future of South Africa?
2019-20
spectacular array
an impressive
display (colourful
and attractive)
not unmindful of
conscious of; aware of
chevron
a pattern in the
shape of a V
despised
had a very low
opinion of
19
Nelson Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom
A few moments later we all lifted our eyes in
awe as a spectacular array of South African jets,
helicopters and troop carriers roared in perfect
formation over the Union Buildings. It was not only
a display of pinpoint precision and military force,
but a demonstration of the military’s loyalty to
democracy, to a new government that had been
freely and fairly elected. Only moments before, the
highest generals of the South African defence force
and police, their chests bedecked with ribbons and
medals from days gone by, saluted me and pledged
their loyalty. I was not unmindful of the fact that
not so many years before they would not have
saluted but arrested me. Finally a chevron of Impala
jets left a smoke trail of the black, red, green, blue
and gold of the new South African flag.
The day was symbolised for me by the playing of
our two national anthems, and the vision of whites
singing ‘Nkosi Sikelel –iAfrika’ and blacks singing
‘Die Stem’, the old anthem of the Republic. Although
that day neither group knew the lyrics of the anthem
they once despised, they would soon know the
words by heart.
On the day of the inauguration, I was
overwhelmed with a sense of history. In the first
decade of the twentieth century, a few years after
the bitter Anglo-Boer war and before my own birth,
the white-skinned peoples of South Africa patched
up their differences and erected a system of racial
domination against the dark-skinned peoples of their
own land. The structure they created formed the
basis of one of the harshest, most inhumane,
societies the world has ever known. Now, in the
last decade of the twentieth century, and my own
eighth decade as a man, that system had beenFirst Flight
overturned forever and replaced by one that
recognised the rights and freedoms of all peoples,
regardless of the colour of their skin.
That day had come about through the
unimaginable sacrifices of thousands of my people,
people whose suffering and courage can never be
counted or repaid. I felt that day, as I have on so
many other days, that I was simply the sum of all
those African patriots who had gone before me. That
long and noble line ended and now began again
with me. I was pained that I was not able to thank
them and that they were not able to see what their
sacrifices had wrought.
The policy of apartheid created a deep and lasting
wound in my country and my people. All of us will
spend many years, if not generations, recovering
from that profound hurt. But the decades of
oppression and brutality had another, unintended,
effect, and that was that it produced the Oliver
Tambos, the Walter Sisulus, the Chief Luthulis, the
Yusuf Dadoos, the Bram Fischers, the Robert
Sobukwes of our time* — men of such extraordinary
wrought (old
fashioned, formal
word)
done, achieved
profound
deep and strong
20
Oliver TamboWalter SisuluChief Luthuli
Yusuf DadooBram FischerRobert Sobukwe
* These are some prominent names in the struggle against apartheid.
(For the use of the definite article with proper nouns, see exercise II on page 25)
2019-20resilience
the ability to deal
with any kind of
hardship and recover
from its effects
21
pushed to our
limits
pushed to the last
point in our ability to
bear pain
Oral Comprehension Check
1. What do the military generals do? How has their attitude changed,
and why?
2. Why were two national anthems sung?
3. How does Mandela describe the systems of government in his country
(i) in the first decade, and (ii) in the final decade, of the twentieth century?
4. What does courage mean to Mandela?
5. Which does he think is natural, to love or to hate?
In life, every man has twin obligations —
obligations to his family, to his parents, to his wife
and children; and he has an obligation to his people,
his community, his country. In a civil and humane
2019-20
Nelson Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom
courage, wisdom and generosity that their like may
never be known again. Perhaps it requires such
depths of oppression to create such heights of
character. My country is rich in the minerals and
gems that lie beneath its soil, but I have always
known that its greatest wealth is its people, finer
and truer than the purest diamonds.
It is from these comrades in the struggle that I
learned the meaning of courage. Time and again, I
have seen men and women risk and give their lives
for an idea. I have seen men stand up to attacks
and torture without breaking, showing a strength
and resilience that defies the imagination. I learned
that courage was not the absence of fear, but the
triumph over it. The brave man is not he who does
not feel afraid, but he who conquers that fear.
No one is born hating another person because of
the colour of his skin, or his background, or his
religion. People must learn to hate, and if they can
learn to hate, they can be taught to love, for love
comes more naturally to the human heart than its
opposite. Even in the grimmest times in prison, when
my comrades and I were pushed to our limits, I would
see a glimmer of humanity in one of the guards,
perhaps just for a second, but it was enough to
reassure me and keep me going. Man’s goodness is
a flame that can be hidden but never extinguished.First Flight
22
society, each man is able to fulfil those obligations
according to his own inclinations and abilities. But
in a country like South Africa, it was almost
impossible for a man of my birth and colour to fulfil
both of those obligations. In South Africa, a man of
colour who attempted to live as a human being was
punished and isolated. In South Africa, a man who
tried to fulfil his duty to his people was inevitably
ripped from his family and his home and was forced
to live a life apart, a twilight existence of secrecy
and rebellion. I did not in the beginning choose to
place my people above my family, but in attempting
to serve my people, I found that I was prevented
from fulfilling my obligations as a son, a brother, a
father and a husband.
I was not born with a hunger to be free. I was born
free — free in every way that I could know. Free to
run in the fields near my mother’s hut, free to swim
in the clear stream that ran through my village, free
to roast mealies under the stars and ride the broad
backs of slow-moving bulls. As long as I obeyed my
father and abided by the customs of my tribe, I was
not troubled by the laws of man or God.
It was only when I began to learn that my boyhood
freedom was an illusion, when I discovered as a
young man that my freedom had already been taken
from me, that I began to hunger for it. At first, as a
student, I wanted freedom only for myself, the
transitory freedoms of being able to stay out at night,
read what I pleased and go where I chose. Later, as
a young man in Johannesburg, I yearned for the
basic and honourable freedoms of achieving my
potential, of earning my keep, of marrying and
having a family — the freedom not to be obstructed
in a lawful life.
But then I slowly saw that not only was I not
free, but my brothers and sisters were not free. I
saw that it was not just my freedom that was
curtailed, but the freedom of everyone who looked
like I did. That is when I joined the African National
Congress, and that is when the hunger for my own
freedom became the greater hunger for the freedom
2019-20
inclinations
natural tendencies
of behaviour
inevitably
unavoidably
illusion
something that
appears to be real
but is not
transitory
not permanent
curtailed
reduced2019-20
23
prejudice
a strong dislike
without any good
reason
Nelson Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom
of my people. It was this desire for the freedom of
my people to live their lives with dignity and self-
respect that animated my life, that transformed a
frightened young man into a bold one, that drove a
law-abiding attorney to become a criminal, that
turned a family-loving husband into a man without
a home, that forced a life-loving man to live like a
monk. I am no more virtuous or self-sacrificing
than the next man, but I found that I could not
even enjoy the poor and limited freedoms I was
allowed when I knew my people were not free.
Freedom is indivisible; the chains on anyone of
my people were the chains on all of them, the
chains on all of my people were the chains on me.
I knew that the oppressor must be liberated just
as surely as the oppressed. A man who takes away
another man’s freedom is a prisoner of hatred; he is
locked behind the bars of prejudice and narrow-
mindedness. I am not truly free if I am taking away
someone else’s freedom, just as surely as I am not
free when my freedom is taken from me. The oppressed
and the oppressor alike are robbed of their humanity.Oral Comprehension Check
1. What “twin obligations” does Mandela mention?
2. What did being free mean to Mandela as a boy, and as a student? How
does he contrast these “transitory freedoms” with “the basic and
honourable freedoms”?
3. Does Mandela think the oppressor is free? Why/Why not?
1. Why did such a large number of international leaders attend the inauguration?
What did it signify the triumph of?
2. What does Mandela mean when he says he is “simply the sum of all those
African patriots” who had gone before him?
First Flight
3. Would you agree that the “depths of oppression” create “heights of character”?
How does Mandela illustrate this? Can you add your own examples to this
argument?
24
4. How did Mandela’s understanding of freedom change with age and
experience?
5. How did Mandela’s ‘hunger for freedom’ change his life?
I. There are nouns in the text (formation, government) which are formed from
the corresponding verbs (form, govern) by suffixing -(at)ion or ment. There
may be a change in the spelling of some verb – noun pairs: such as rebel,
rebellion; constitute, constitution.
1. Make a list of such pairs of nouns and verbs in the text.
Noun
Verb
rebellionrebel
constitutionconstitute
2019-202. Read the paragraph below. Fill in the blanks with the noun forms of
the verbs in brackets.
Martin Luther King’s
(contribute) to our history as an
outstanding leader began when he came to the
(assist) of
Rosa Parks, a seamstress who refused to give up her seat on a bus to a
white passenger. In those days American Blacks were confined to
positions of second class citizenship by restrictive laws and customs. To
break these laws would mean
(subjugate) and
(humiliate) by the police and the legal system. Beatings,
(imprison) and sometimes death awaited those who defied the System.
Martin Luther King’s tactics of protest involved non-violent
(resist) to racial injustice.
II. Using the Definite Article with Names
You know that the definite article ‘the’ is not normally used before proper
nouns. Nor do proper nouns usually occur in the plural. (We do not say:
*The Nelson Mandela, or *Nelson Mandelas.) But now look at this sentence
from the text:
25
… the decades of oppression and brutality … produced the Oliver Tambos,
the Walter Sisulus, … of our time.
Used in this way with the and/or in the plural, a proper noun carries a
special meaning. For example, what do you think the names above mean?
Choose the right answer.
(b) many other men like Oliver Tambo, Walter Sisulu …/many men of
their type or kind, whose names may not be as well known.
Did you choose option (b)? Then you have the right answer!
Here are some more examples of ‘the’ used with proper names. Try to
say what these sentences mean. (You may consult a dictionary if you
wish. Look at the entry for ‘the’.)
1. Mr Singh regularly invites the Amitabh Bachchans and the Shah Rukh
Khans to his parties.
2. Many people think that Madhuri Dixit is the Madhubala of our times.
3. History is not only the story of the Alexanders, the Napoleons and the
Hitlers, but of ordinary people as well.
2019-20
Nelson Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom
(a) for example Oliver Tambo, Walter Sisulu, …III. Idiomatic Expressions
Match the italicised phrases in Column A with the phrase nearest in
meaning in Column B. (Hint: First look for the sentence in the text in
which the phrase in Column A occurs.)
AB
1. I was not unmindful of(i) had not forgotten; was aware of the fact
the fact
(ii) was not careful about the fact
(iii) forgot or was not aware of the fact
(i) pushed by the guards to the wall
2. when my comrades
and I were pushed to
our limits
(ii) took more than our share of beatings
(iii) felt that we could not endure the
suffering any longer
(i) make me go on walking
3. to reassure me and
First Flight
keep me going
(ii) help me continue to live in hope in this
very difficult situation
(iii) make me remain without complaining
4. the basic and
(i) earning enough money to live on
honourable freedoms
of…earning my keep,…
(ii) keeping what I earned
(iii) getting a good salary
26
In groups, discuss the issues suggested in the box below. Then prepare a
speech of about two minutes on the following topic. (First make notes for
your speech in writing.)
True liberty is freedom from poverty, deprivation and all forms of
discrimination.
• causes of poverty and means of overcoming it
• discrimination based on gender, religion, class, etc.
• constitutionally guaranteed human rights
I. Looking at Contrasts
Nelson Mandela’s writing is marked by balance: many sentences have two
parts in balance.
2019-20Use the following phrases to complete the sentences given below.
(i) they can be taught to love.(iv) but he who conquers that fear.
(ii) I was born free.(v) to create such heights of
character.
(iii) but the triumph over it.
1. It requires such depths of oppression
2. Courage was not the absence of fear
3. The brave man is not he who does not feel afraid
4. If people can learn to hate
5. I was not born with a hunger to be free.
II. This text repeatedly contrasts the past with the present or the future. We
can use coordinated clauses to contrast two views, for emphasis or effect.
Given below are sentences carrying one part of the contrast. Find in the text
the second part of the contrast, and complete each item. Identify the words
which signal the contrast. This has been done for you in the first item.
1. For decades the Union Buildings had been the seat of white supremacy,
and now ...
27
2. Only moments before, the highest generals of the South African defence
force and police ... saluted me and pledged their loyalty. ... not so many
years before they would not have saluted
3. Although that day neither group knew the lyrics of the anthem ..., they
4. My country is rich in the minerals and gems that lie beneath its soil,
5. The Air Show was not only a display of pinpoint precision and military
force, but
6. It was this desire for the freedom of my people ... that transformed
into a bold one, that drove
criminal, that turned
to become a
into a man without a home.
III. Expressing Your Opinion
Do you think there is colour prejudice in our own country? Discuss this
with your friend and write a paragraph of about 100 to 150 words about
2019-20
Nelson Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom
would soonthis. You have the option of making your paragraph a humorous one.
(Read the short verse given below.)
When you were born you were pink
When you grew up you became white
When you are in the sun you are red
When you are sick you are yellow
When you are angry you are purple
When you are shocked you are grey
And you have the cheek to call me ‘coloured’.
WHAT WE HAVE DONE
First Flight
Shared Nelson Mandela’s moving description of his inauguration as South Africa’s first
black President, and his thoughts on freedom.
WHAT YOU CAN D O
Divide your class into three groups and give each group one of the following topics to
research: (i) black Americans, and their fight against discrimination, (ii) women, and
their fight for equality, (iii) the Vietnamese, and their fight for independence.
Choose a student from each group to present a short summary of each topic to
the class.
28
Homophones
Can you find the words below that are spelt
similarly, and sometimes even pronounced
similarly, but have very different meanings? Check
their pronunciation and meaning in a dictionary.
• The bandage was wound around the wound.
• The soldier decided to desert his dessert in the
desert.
2019-20A T
iger in the Zoo
Tiger
This poem contrasts a tiger in the zoo with the tiger in its natural
habitat. The poem moves from the zoo to the jungle, and back again
to the zoo. Read the poem silently once, and say which stanzas
speak about the tiger in the zoo, and which ones speak about the
tiger in the jungle.
He stalks in his vivid stripes
The few steps of his cage,
On pads of velvet quiet,
In his quiet rage.
He should be lurking in shadow,
Sliding through long grass
Near the water hole
Where plump deer pass.
He should be snarling around houses
At the jungle’s edge,
Baring his white fangs, his claws,
Terrorising the village!
But he’s locked in a concrete cell,
His strength behind bars,
Stalking the length of his cage,
Ignoring visitors.
He hears the last voice at night,
The patrolling cars,
And stares with his brilliant eyes
At the brilliant stars.
LESLIE NORRIS
2019-20snarls: makes an angry, warning sound
1. Read the poem again, and work in pairs or groups to do the following tasks.
(i) Find the words that describe the movements and actions of the tiger in
the cage and in the wild. Arrange them in two columns.
(ii) Find the words that describe the two places, and arrange them in two
columns.
Now try to share ideas about how the poet uses words and images to contrast
the two situations.
First Flight
2. Notice the use of a word repeated in lines such as these:
(i) On pads of velvet quiet,
In his quiet rage.
(ii) And stares with his brilliant eyes
At the brilliant stars.
30
What do you think is the effect of this repetition?
3. Read the following two poems — one about a tiger and the other about a
panther. Then discuss:
Are zoos necessary for the protection or conservation of some species of
animals? Are they useful for educating the public? Are there alternatives
to zoos?
The Tiger
The tiger behind the bars of his cage growls,
The tiger behind the bars of his cage snarls,
The tiger behind the bars of his cage roars.
Then he thinks.
It would be nice not to be behind bars all
The time
Because they spoil my view
I wish I were wild, not on show.
But if I were wild, hunters might shoot me,
But if I were wild, food might poison me,
But if I were wild, water might drown me.
Then he stops thinking
And...
The tiger behind the bars of his cage growls,
The tiger behind the bars of his cage snarls,
The tiger behind the bars of his cage roars.
PETER NIBLETT
2019-20The Panther
His vision, from the constantly passing bars,
has grown so weary that it cannot hold
anything else. It seems to him there are
a thousand bars; and behind the bars, no world.
As he paces in cramped circles, over and over,
the movement of his powerful soft strides
is like a ritual dance around a centre
in which a mighty will stands paralysed.
Only at times, the curtain of the pupils
lifts, quietly. An image enters in,
rushes down through the tensed, arrested muscles,
plunges into the heart and is gone.
RAINER MARIA RILKE
4. Take a point of view for or against zoos, or even consider both points of view
and write a couple of paragraphs or speak about this topic for a couple of
minutes in class.
31
A Tiger in the Zoo
The Greater Cats
The greater cats with golden eyes
Stare out between the bars.
Deserts are there, and different skies,
And night with different stars.
VICTORIA SACKVILLE-WEST
2019-20BEFORE YOU READ
Since the earliest times, humans have dreamt of conquering the
skies. Here are two stories about flying.
I. A young seagull is afraid to fly. How does he conquer his fear?
II. A pilot is lost in storm clouds. Does he arrive safe? Who helps
him?
I
His First Flight
THE young seagull was alone on his ledge. His two
brothers and his sister had already flown away the
day before. He had been afraid to fly with them.
Somehow when he had taken a little run forward to
the brink of the ledge and attempted to flap his
wings he became afraid. The great expanse of sea
stretched down beneath, and it was such a long
way down — miles down. He felt certain that his
wings would never support him; so he bent his head
and ran away back to the little hole under the ledge
where he slept at night. Even when each of his
brothers and his little sister, whose wings were far
shorter than his own, ran to the brink, flapped their
wings, and flew away, he failed to muster up courage
to take that plunge which appeared to him so
desperate. His father and mother had come around
2019-20
ledge
a narrow horizontal
shelf projecting from
a wall or (here) a cliffcalling to him shrilly, upbraiding him, threatening
to let him starve on his ledge unless he flew away.
But for the life of him he could not move.
That was twenty-four hours ago. Since then
nobody had come near him. The day before, all day
long, he had watched his parents flying about with
his brothers and sister, perfecting them in the art
of flight, teaching them how to skim the waves and
how to dive for fish. He had, in fact, seen his older
brother catch his first herring and devour it,
standing on a rock, while his parents circled around
raising a proud cackle. And all the morning the
whole family had walked about on the big plateau
midway down the opposite cliff taunting him with
his cowardice.
The sun was now ascending the sky, blazing on
his ledge that faced the south. He felt the heat
because he had not eaten since the previous nightfall.
He stepped slowly out to the brink of the ledge,
and standing on one leg with the other leg hidden
under his wing, he closed one eye, then the other,
upbraiding
scolding
(to) skim
to move lightly just
above a surface
(here, the sea)
herring
a soft-finned sea fish
33
Two Stories about Flying
2019-20First Flight
and pretended to be falling asleep. Still they took
no notice of him. He saw his two brothers and his
sister lying on the plateau dozing with their heads
sunk into their necks. His father was preening the
feathers on his white back. Only his mother was
looking at him. She was standing on a little high
hump on the plateau, her white breast thrust
forward. Now and again, she tore at a piece of fish
that lay at her feet and then scrapped each side of
her beak on the rock. The sight of the food maddened
him. How he loved to tear food that way, scrapping
his beak now and again to whet it.
“Ga, ga, ga,” he cried begging her to bring him
some food. “Gaw-col-ah,” she screamed back
derisively. But he kept calling plaintively, and
after a minute or so he uttered a joyful scream.
His mother had picked up a piece of the fish and
was flying across to him with it. He leaned out
34
2019-20
preening
making an effort to
maintain feathers
(to) whet
to sharpen
derisively
in a manner
showing someone
that she/he is stupid2019-20
dizzy
an uncomfortable
feeling of spinning
around and losing
one’s balance
35
curveting
leaping like a horse
banking
flying with one wing
higher than the other
Two Stories about Flying
eagerly, tapping the rock with his feet, trying to
get nearer to her as she flew across. But when
she was just opposite to him, she halted, her
wings motionless, the piece of fish in her beak
almost within reach of his beak. He waited a
moment in surprise, wondering why she did not
come nearer, and then, maddened by hunger, he
dived at the fish. With a loud scream he fell
outwards and downwards into space. Then a
monstrous terror seized him and his heart stood
still. He could hear nothing. But it only lasted a
minute. The next moment he felt his wings spread
outwards. The wind rushed against his breast
feathers, then under his stomach, and against his
wings. He could feel the tips of his wings cutting
through the air. He was not falling headlong now.
He was soaring gradually downwards and outwards.
He was no longer afraid. He just felt a bit dizzy.
Then he flapped his wings once and he soared
upwards. “Ga, ga, ga, Ga, ga, ga, Gaw-col-ah,” his
mother swooped past him, her wings making a
loud noise. He answered her with another scream.
Then his father flew over him screaming. He saw
his two brothers and his sister flying around him
curveting and banking and soaring and diving.
Then he completely forgot that he had not always
been able to fly, and commended himself to dive
and soar and curve, shrieking shrilly.
He was near the sea now, flying straight over
it, facing straight out over the ocean. He saw a
vast green sea beneath him, with little ridges
moving over it and he turned his beak sideways
and cawed amusedly.
His parents and his brothers and sister had
landed on this green flooring ahead of him. They
were beckoning to him, calling shrilly. He dropped
his legs to stand on the green sea. His legs sank
into it. He screamed with fright and attempted to
rise again flapping his wings. But he was tired and
weak with hunger and he could not rise, exhaustedby the strange exercise. His feet sank into the green
sea, and then his belly touched it and he sank no
farther. He was floating on it, and around him his
family was screaming, praising him and their beaks
were offering him scraps of dog-fish.
He had made his first flight.
1. Why was the young seagull afraid to fly? Do you think all young birds are
afraid to make their first flight, or are some birds more timid than others?
Do you think a human baby also finds it a challenge to take its first steps?
First Flight
2. “The sight of the food maddened him.” What does this suggest? What
compelled the young seagull to finally fly?
36
3. “They were beckoning to him, calling shrilly.” Why did the seagull’s father
and mother threaten him and cajole him to fly?
4. Have you ever had a similar experience, where your parents encouraged
you to do something that you were too scared to try? Discuss this in pairs
or groups.
5. In the case of a bird flying, it seems a natural act, and a foregone conclusion
that it should succeed. In the examples you have given in answer to the
previous question, was your success guaranteed, or was it important for
you to try, regardless of a possibility of failure?
We have just read about the first flight of a young seagull. Your teacher will
now divide the class into groups. Each group will work on one of the following
topics. Prepare a presentation with your group members and then present it
to the entire class.
• Progression of Models of Airplanes
• Progression of Models of Motorcars
• Birds and Their Wing Span
• Migratory Birds — Tracing Their Flights
Write a short composition on your initial attempts at learning a skill. You could
describe the challenges of learning to ride a bicycle or learning to swim. Make it
as humorous as possible.
2019-20II
The Black Aeroplane
2019-20
37
Two Stories about Flying
THE moon was coming up in the east, behind me,
and stars were shining in the clear sky above me.
There wasn’t a cloud in the sky. I was happy to be
alone high up above the sleeping countryside. I was
flying my old Dakota aeroplane over France back to
England. I was dreaming of my holiday and looking
forward to being with my family. I looked at my
watch: one thirty in the morning.
‘I should call Paris Control soon,’ I thought. As I
looked down past the nose of the aeroplane, I saw
the lights of a big city in front of me. I switched on
the radio and said, “Paris Control, Dakota DS 088
here. Can you hear me? I’m on my way to England.
Over.”
The voice from the radio answered me immediately:
“DS 088, I can hear you. You ought to turn twelve
degrees west now, DS 088. Over.”
I checked the map and the compass, switched
over to my second and last fuel tank, and turned
the Dakota twelve degrees west towards England.
‘I’ll be in time for breakfast,’ I thought. A good
big English breakfast! Everything was going well —
it was an easy flight.
Paris was about 150 kilometres behind me when
I saw the clouds. Storm clouds. They were huge.
They looked like black mountains standing in front
of me across the sky. I knew I could not fly up and
over them, and I did not have enough fuel to fly
around them to the north or south.
“I ought to go back to Paris,” I thought, but I
wanted to get home. I wanted that breakfast.
‘I’ll take the risk,’ I thought, and flew that old
Dakota straight into the storm.
Inside the clouds, everything was suddenly black.
It was impossible to see anything outside the
aeroplane. The old aeroplane jumped and twisted
in the air. I looked at the compass. I couldn’t believeFirst Flight
38
my eyes: the compass was turning round and round
and round. It was dead. It would not work! The
other instruments were suddenly dead, too. I tried
the radio.
“Paris Control? Paris Control? Can you hear me?”
There was no answer. The radio was dead too. I
had no radio, no compass, and I could not see where
I was. I was lost in the storm. Then, in the black
clouds quite near me, I saw another aeroplane. It
had no lights on its wings, but I could see it flying
next to me through the storm. I could see the pilot’s
face — turned towards me. I was very glad to see
another person. He lifted one hand and waved.
“Follow me,” he was saying. “Follow me.”
‘He knows that I am lost,’ I thought. ‘He’s trying
to help me.’
He turned his aeroplane slowly to the north, in
front of my Dakota, so that it would be easier for
me to follow him. I was very happy to go behind the
strange aeroplane like an obedient child.
After half an hour the strange black aeroplane
was still there in front of me in the clouds. Now
2019-202019-20
39
Two Stories about Flying
there was only enough fuel in the old Dakota’s last
tank to fly for five or ten minutes more. I was
starting to feel frightened again. But then he started
to go down and I followed through the storm.
Suddenly I came out of the clouds and saw two
long straight lines of lights in front of me. It was a
runway! An airport! I was safe! I turned to look for
my friend in the black aeroplane, but the sky was
empty. There was nothing there. The black
aeroplane was gone. I could not see it anywhere.
I landed and was not sorry to walk away from the
old Dakota near the control tower. I went and asked
a woman in the control centre where I was and who
the other pilot was. I wanted to say ‘Thank you’.
She looked at me very strangely, and then
laughed.
“Another aeroplane? Up there in this storm? No
other aeroplanes were flying tonight. Yours was the
only one I could see on the radar.”
So who helped me to arrive there safely without
a compass or a radio, and without any more fuel in
my tanks? Who was the pilot on the strange black
aeroplane, flying in the storm, without lights?1. “I’ll take the risk.” What is the risk? Why does the narrator take it?
2. Describe the narrator’s experience as he flew the aeroplane into the storm.
3. Why does the narrator say, “I landed and was not sorry to walk away from
the old Dakota…”?
4. What made the woman in the control centre look at the narrator strangely?
5. Who do you think helped the narrator to reach safely? Discuss this among
yourselves and give reasons for your answer.
I. Study the sentences given below.
(a) They looked like black mountains.
(b) Inside the clouds, everything was suddenly black.
(c) In the black clouds near me, I saw another aeroplane.
First Flight
(d) The strange black aeroplane was there.
40
The word ‘black’ in sentences (a) and (c) refers to the very darkest colour.
But in (b) and (d) (here) it means without light/with no light.
‘Black’ has a variety of meanings in different contexts. For example:
(a) ‘I prefer black tea’ means ‘I prefer tea without milk’.
(b) ‘With increasing pollution the future of the world is black’ means
‘With increasing pollution the future of the world is very depressing/
without hope’.
Now, try to guess the meanings of the word ‘black’ in the sentences
given below. Check the meanings in the dictionary and find out whether
you have guessed right.
1. Go and have a bath; your hands and face are absolutely black.
2. The taxi-driver gave Ratan a black look as he crossed the road when the
traffic light was green.
3. The bombardment of Hiroshima is one of the blackest crimes against
humanity.
4. Very few people enjoy Harold Pinter’s black comedy.
5. Sometimes shopkeepers store essential goods to create false scarcity
and then sell these in black.
6. Villagers had beaten the criminal black and blue.
2019-20II. Look at these sentences taken from the lesson you have just read:
(a) I was flying my old Dakota aeroplane.
(b) The young seagull had been afraid to fly with them.
In the first sentence the author was controlling an aircraft in the air. Another
example is: Children are flying kites. In the second sentence the seagull
was afraid to move through the air, using its wings.
Match the phrases given under Column A with their meanings given
under Column B:
A
B
1. Fly a flag
– Move quickly/suddenly
2. Fly into rage– Be successful
3. Fly along– Display a flag on a long pole
4. Fly high– Escape from a place
5. Fly the coop– Become suddenly very angry
III. We know that the word ‘fly’ (of birds/insects) means to move through
air using wings. Tick the words which have the same or nearly the same
meaning.
41
swoopflitpaddleflutter
ascendfloatrideskim
sinkdarthoverglide
descendsoarshootspring
stayfallsailflap
WHAT WE HAVE DONE
Provided two stories about flying — one about a bird, another about a human being in
a plane.
WHAT YOU CAN D O
• As they read the story of the seagull, students can be asked to imagine how a baby
learns to walk, and compare and contrast the two situations.
2019-20
Two Stories about Flying
Have you ever been alone or away from home during a thunderstorm? Narrate
your experience in a paragraph.• After they read the second story students should be asked for their ideas about the
phantom plane: Was it really there or did the pilot imagine it? If the students feel it
was really there, who could have been piloting it?
First Flight
• Ask students to narrate their own stories about flying. It could be about flying in an
airplane, or flying a kite, or about watching a bird flying — in short, anything to do
with flight. Give students ten minutes to think quietly about the topic — during this
time, they can make notes about what they want to say. Then ask for volunteer
speakers.
42
Compound Words Whose Parts Mean Just
the Opposite or Something Else
• Quicksand works slowly
• There in no egg in eggplant nor ham in
hamburger; neither apple nor pine in pineapple.
• Boxing rings are square
2019-20Ho
w to T
ell W
ild Animals
How
Tell
Wild
This humorous poem suggests some dangerous ways to identify (or
‘tell’) wild animals! Read it aloud, keeping to a strong and regular
rhythm.
If ever you should go by chance
To jungles in the east;
And if there should to you advance
A large and tawny beast,
If he roars at you as you’re dyin’
You’ll know it is the Asian Lion...
Or if some time when roaming round,
A noble wild beast greets you,
With black stripes on a yellow ground,
Just notice if he eats you.
This simple rule may help you learn
The Bengal Tiger to discern.
If strolling forth, a beast you view,
Whose hide with spots is peppered,
As soon as he has lept on you,
You’ll know it is the Leopard.
’Twill do no good to roar with pain,
He’ll only lep and lep again.
2019-20If when you’re walking round your yard
You meet a creature there,
Who hugs you very, very hard,
Be sure it is a Bear.
If you have any doubts, I guess
He’ll give you just one more caress.
First Flight
Though to distinguish beasts of prey
A novice might nonplus,
The Crocodile you always may
Tell from the Hyena thus:
Hyenas come with merry smiles;
But if they weep they’re Crocodiles.
44
The true Chameleon is small,
A lizard sort of thing;
He hasn’t any ears at all,
And not a single wing.
If there is nothing on the tree,
’Tis the chameleon you see.
CAROLYN WELLS
ground: background
discern: make out; identify
hide: animal skin
peppered: here, covered with spots
caress: a gentle, loving touch
novice: someone new to a job
(be) nonplus (sed) (usually only in the passive): (be) puzzle(d), confuse(d),
surprise(d)
2019-201. Does ‘dyin’ really rhyme with ‘lion’? Can you say it in such a way that it does?
2. How does the poet suggest that you identify the lion and the tiger? When
can you do so, according to him?
3. Do you think the words ‘lept‘ and ‘lep’ in the third stanza are spelt correctly?
Why does the poet spell them like this?
4. Do you know what a ‘bearhug’ is? It’s a friendly and strong hug — such as
bears are thought to give, as they attack you! Again, hyenas are thought to
laugh, and crocodiles to weep (‘crocodile tears’) as they swallow their victims.
Are there similar expressions and popular ideas about wild animals in your
own language(s)?
5. Look at the line “A novice might nonplus”. How would you write this
‘correctly’? Why is the poet’s ‘incorrect’ line better in the poem?
6. Can you find other examples of poets taking liberties with language, either
in English or in your own language(s)? Can you find examples of humorous
poems in your own language(s)?
7. Much of the humour in the poem arises from the way language is used,
although the ideas are funny as well. If there are particular lines in the
poem that you especially like, share these with the class, speaking briefly
about what it is about the ideas or the language that you like or find funny.
45
We have noses that run and feet that smell
2019-20
How to Tell Wild Animals
English is funny, because...The Ball Poem
A boy loses a ball. He is very upset. A ball doesn’t cost much, nor is
it difficult to buy another ball. Why then is the boy so upset? Read
the poem to see what the poet thinks has been lost, and what the
boy has to learn from the experience of losing something.
What is the boy now, who has lost his ball,
What, what is he to do? I saw it go
Merrily bouncing, down the street, and then
Merrily over — there it is in the water!
No use to say ‘O there are other balls’:
An ultimate shaking grief fixes the boy
As he stands rigid, trembling, staring down
All his young days into the harbour where
His ball went. I would not intrude on him;
A dime, another ball, is worthless. Now
He senses first responsibility
In a world of possessions. People will take
Balls, balls will be lost always, little boy.
And no one buys a ball back. Money is external.
He is learning, well behind his desperate eyes,
The epistemology of loss, how to stand up
Knowing what every man must one day know
And most know many days, how to stand up.
JOHN BERRYMAN
O there are other balls: The words suggest that the loss is not important enough
to worry about
shaking grief: sadness which greatly affects the boy
rigid: stiff
2019-20(to) intrude on: here, to enter a situation where one is not welcome
a dime: ten cents (U.S.)
desperate: hopeless
epistemology of loss: understanding the nature of loss — what it means to
lose something
epistemology: The Greek word episteme means ‘knowledge’ (it comes from a
word meaning ‘to understand, to know’). Epistemology is the study of the
nature of knowledge itself.
In pairs, attempt the following questions.
1. Why does the poet say, “I would not intrude on him”? Why doesn’t he offer
him money to buy another ball?
2. “… staring down/All his young days into the harbour where/His ball went …”
Do you think the boy has had the ball for a long time? Is it linked to the
memories of days when he played with it?
3. What does “in the world of possessions” mean?
4. Do you think the boy has lost anything earlier? Pick out the words that
suggest the answer.
5. What does the poet say the boy is learning from the loss of the ball? Try to
explain this in your own words.
47
6. Have you ever lost something you liked very much? Write a paragraph
describing how you felt then, and saying whether — and how — you got over
your loss.
The Ball Poem
2019-20BEFORE YOU READ
Anneliese Marie ‘Anne’ Frank (12
June 1929 – February/March
1945) was a German – born
Jewish girl who wrote while in
hiding with her family and four
friends in Amsterdam during the
German occupation of the
Netherlands in World War II. Her
family had moved to Amsterdam
after the Nazis gained power in
“This is a photo as I would wish Germany but were trapped when
myself to look all the time. Then
the Nazi occupation extended into
I would, maybe, have a chance
the Netherlands. As persecutions
to come to Hollywood.”
– Anne Frank, 10 October 1942 against the Jewish population
increased, the family went into
hiding in July 1942 in hidden rooms in her father Otto Frank’s
office building. After two years in hiding, the group was betrayed
and transported to the concentration camp system where Anne died
of typhus in Bergen-Belsen within days of her sister, Margot Frank.
Her father, Otto, the only survivor of the group, returned to Amsterdam
after the war ended, to find that her diary had been saved. Convinced
that it was a unique record, he took action to have it published in
English under the name The Diary of a Young Girl.
The diary was given to Anne Frank for her thirteenth birthday
and chronicles the events of her life from 12 June 1942 until its
final entry of 1 August 1944. It was eventually translated from its
original Dutch into many languages and became one of the world’s
most widely read books. There have also been several films,
television and theatrical productions, and even an opera, based on
the diary. Described as the work of a mature and insightful mind,
the diary provides an intimate examination of daily life under Nazi
occupation. Anne Frank has become one of the most renowned and
discussed of the Holocaust victims.
2019-20Activity
1. Do you keep a diary? Given below under ‘A’ are some terms we
use to describe a written record of personal experience. Can
you match them with their descriptions under ‘B’? (You may
look up the terms in a dictionary if you wish.)
A
B
(i) Journal
(ii) Diary
(iii) Log
(iv) Memoir(s)
– A book with a separate space or page for each
day, in which you write down your thoughts
and feelings or what has happened on that day
– A full record of a journey, a period of time, or
an event, written every day
– A record of a person’s own life and experiences
(usually, a famous person)
– A written record of events with times and
dates, usually official
2. Here are some entries from personal records. Use the definitions
above to decide which of the entries might be from a diary, a
journal, a log or a memoir.
(i) I woke up very late today and promptly got a scolding from
Mum! I can’t help it — how can I miss the FIFA World Cup
matches?
Ans:
Went to the office of the Director
Had lunch with Chairman
Received Rahul at the airport
Dinner at home
(iii) The ride to Ooty was uneventful. We rested for a while every
50 km or so, and used the time to capture the magnificent
landscape with my HandyCam. From Ooty we went on to
Bangalore.
What a contrast! The noise and pollution of this once-beautiful
city really broke my heart.
Ans:
(iv) This is how Raj Kapoor found me — all wet and ragged
outside R.K.Studios. He was then looking for just someone
like this for a small role in Mera Naam Joker, and he cast
me on the spot. The rest, as they say, is history!
Ans:
2019-20
From the Diary of Anne Frank
(ii) 10:30 a.m.
01:00 p.m.
05:45 p.m.
09:30 p.m.
Ans:
49First Flight
50
WRITING in a diary is a really strange experience for
someone like me. Not only because I’ve never written
anything before, but also because it seems to me
that later on neither I nor anyone else will be
interested in the musings of a thirteen-year -old
schoolgirl. Oh well, it doesn’t matter. I feel like
writing, and I have an even greater need to get all
kinds of things off my chest.
‘Paper has more patience than people.’ I thought
of this saying on one of those days when I was feeling
a little depressed and was sitting at home with my
chin in my hands, bored and listless, wondering
whether to stay in or go out. I finally stayed where I
was, brooding: Yes, paper does have more patience,
and since I’m not planning to let anyone else read
this stiff-backed notebook grandly referred to as a
‘diary’, unless I should ever find a real friend, it
probably won’t make a bit of difference.
Now I’m back to the point that prompted me
to keep a diary in the first place: I don’t have a
friend.
Let me put it more clearly, since no one will
believe that a thirteen-year-old girl is completely
alone in the world. And I’m not. I have loving parents
and a sixteen-year-old sister, and there are about
thirty people I can call friends. I have a family,
loving aunts and a good home. No, on the surface I
seem to have everything, except my one true friend.
All I think about when I’m with friends is having a
good time. I can’t bring myself to talk about anything
but ordinary everyday things. We don’t seem to be
able to get any closer, and that’s the problem. Maybe
it’s my fault that we don’t confide in each other. In
any case, that’s just how things are, and
unfortunately they’re not liable to change. This is
why I’ve started the diary.
To enhance the image of this long-awaited friend
in my imagination, I don’t want to jot down the
facts in this diary the way most people would do,
but I want the diary to be my friend, and I’m going
to call this friend ‘Kitty’.
2019-20
listless
with no energy or
interest
confide
to tell personal
things privately to a
person that one
trustsOral Comprehension Check
1. What makes writing in a diary a strange experience for Anne Frank?
2. Why does Anne want to keep a diary?
3. Why did Anne think she could confide more in her diary than in people?
Oral Comprehension Check
1. Why does Anne provide a brief sketch of her life?
2. What tells you that Anne loved her grandmother?
2019-20
plunked down (an
informal word)
put down in a casual
way
51
From the Diary of Anne Frank
Since no one would understand a word of my
stories to Kitty if I were to plunge right in, I’d better
provide a brief sketch of my life, much as I dislike
doing so.
My father, the most adorable father I’ve ever seen,
didn’t marry my mother until he was thirty-six and
she was twenty-five. My sister, Margot, was born
in Frankfurt in Germany in 1926. I was born on 12
June 1929. I lived in Frankfurt until I was four. My
father emigrated to Holland in 1933. My mother,
Edith Hollander Frank, went with him to Holland
in September, while Margot and I were sent to
Aachen to stay with our grandmother. Margot went
to Holland in December, and I followed in February,
when I was plunked down on the table as a birthday
present for Margot.
I started right away at the Montessori nursery
school. I stayed there until I was six, at which time
I started in the first form. In the sixth form my
teacher was Mrs Kuperus, the headmistress. At the
end of the year we were both in tears as we said a
heartbreaking farewell.
In the summer of 1941 Grandma fell ill and had
to have an operation, so my birthday passed with
little celebration.
Grandma died in January 1942. No one knows
how often I think of her and still love her. This
birthday celebration in 1942 was intended to make
up for the other, and Grandma’s candle was lit along
with the rest.
The four of us are still doing well, and that brings
me to the present date of 20 June 1942, and the
solemn dedication of my diary.First Flight
Saturday, 20 June 1942
52
Dearest Kitty,
Our entire class is quaking in its boots. The
reason, of course, is the forthcoming meeting in
which the teachers decide who’ll move up to the
next form and who’ll be kept back. Half the class is
making bets. G.N. and I laugh ourselves silly at the
two boys behind us, C.N. and Jacques, who have
staked their entire holiday savings on their bet.
From morning to night, it’s “You’re going to pass”,
“No, I’m not”, “Yes, you are”, “No, I’m not”. Even G.’s
pleading glances and my angry outbursts can’t calm
them down. If you ask me, there are so many
dummies that about a quarter of the class should
be kept back, but teachers are the most
unpredictable creatures on earth.
I’m not so worried about my girlfriends and
myself. We’ll make it. The only subject I’m not sure
about is maths. Anyway, all we can do is wait. Until
then, we keep telling each other not to lose heart.
I get along pretty well with all my teachers. There
are nine of them, seven men and two women. Mr
Keesing, the old fogey who teaches maths, was
annoyed with me for ages because I talked so much.
After several warnings, he assigned me extra
homework. An essay on the subject, ‘A Chatterbox’.
A chatterbox — what can you write about that? I’d
worry about that later, I decided. I jotted down the
title in my notebook, tucked it in my bag and tried
to keep quiet.
That evening, after I’d finished the rest of my
homework, the note about the essay caught my eye.
I began thinking about the subject while chewing
the tip of my fountain pen. Anyone could ramble on
and leave big spaces between the words, but the
trick was to come up with convincing arguments to
prove the necessity of talking. I thought and
thought, and suddenly I had an idea. I wrote the
three pages Mr Keesing had assigned me and was
satisfied. I argued that talking is a student’s trait
and that I would do my best to keep it under control,
2019-20
quaking in its boots
shaking with fear
and nervousness
old fogey
an old-fashioned
person
ramble on
talk or write
aimlessly for long
convincing
argument
a statement made in
such a manner that
people believe itbut that I would never be able to cure myself of the
habit since my mother talked as much as I did if
not more, and that there’s not much you can do
about inherited traits.
Mr Keesing had a good laugh at my arguments,
but when I proceeded to talk my way through the
next lesson, he assigned me a second essay. This
time it was supposed to be on ‘An Incorrigible
Chatterbox’. I handed it in, and Mr Keesing had
nothing to complain about for two whole lessons.
However, during the third lesson he’d finally had
enough. “Anne Frank, as punishment for talking in
class, write an essay entitled — ‘Quack, Quack,
Quack, Said Mistress Chatterbox’.”
inherited traits
qualities (physical or
mental) that one gets
from one’s parents
incorrigible
something that
cannot be corrected
(usually a bad
quality)
53
2019-20
From the Diary of Anne Frank
The class roared. I had to laugh too, though I’d
nearly exhausted my ingenuity on the topic of ingenuity
chatterboxes. It was time to come up with originality and
something else, something original. My friend, inventiveness
Sanne, who’s good at poetry, offered to help me write
the essay from beginning to end in verse and I
jumped for joy. Mr Keesing was trying to play a
joke on me with this ridiculous subject, but I’d make
sure the joke was on him.
I finished my poem, and it was beautiful! It was
about a mother duck and a father swan with three
baby ducklings who were bitten to death by the
father because they quacked too much. Luckily, Mr
Keesing took the joke the right way. He read thepoem to the class, adding his own comments, and
to several other classes as well. Since then I’ve been
allowed to talk and haven’t been assigned any extra
homework. On the contrary, Mr Keesing’s always
making jokes these days.
Yours,
Anne
[Extracted from The Diary of a Young Girl,
with slight adaptation]
Oral Comprehension Check
First Flight
1.
2.
3.
4.
54
Why was Mr Keesing annoyed with Anne? What did he ask her to do?
How did Anne justify her being a chatterbox in her essay?
Do you think Mr Keesing was a strict teacher?
What made Mr Keesing allow Anne to talk in class?
1. Was Anne right when she said that the world would not be interested in the
musings of a thirteen-year-old girl?
2. There are some examples of diary or journal entries in the ‘Before You Read’
section. Compare these with what Anne writes in her diary. What language
was the diary originally written in? In what way is Anne’s diary different?
3. Why does Anne need to give a brief sketch about her family? Does she treat
‘Kitty’ as an insider or an outsider?
4. How does Anne feel about her father, her grandmother, Mrs Kuperus and
Mr Keesing? What do these tell you about her?
5. What does Anne write in her first essay?
6. Anne says teachers are most unpredictable. Is Mr Keesing unpredictable?
How?
7. What do these statements tell you about Anne Frank as a person?
(i) We don’t seem to be able to get any closer, and that’s the problem. Maybe
it’s my fault that we don’t confide in each other.
(ii) I don’t want to jot down the facts in this diary the way most people
would, but I want the diary to be my friend.
(iii) Margot went to Holland in December, and I followed in February, when
I was plunked down on the table as a birthday present for Margot.
(iv) If you ask me, there are so many dummies that about a quarter of the
class should be kept back, but teachers are the most unpredictable
creatures on earth.
2019-20(v) Anyone could ramble on and leave big spaces between the words, but
the trick was to come up with convincing arguments to prove the necessity
of talking.
I. Look at the following words.
headmistresslong-awaitedhomework
notebookstiff-backedoutbursts
These words are compound words. They are made up of two or more words.
Compound words can be:
• nouns: headmistress, homework, notebook, outbursts
• adjectives: long-awaited, stiff-backed
• verbs: sleep-walk, baby-sit
Match the compound words under ‘A’ with their meanings under ‘B’.
Use each in a sentence.
A
B
1. Heartbreaking – obeying and respecting the law
2. Homesick
– think about pleasant things, forgetting about the
present
– something produced by a person, machine or
organisation
4. Law-abiding– producing great sadness
5. Overdo– an occasion when vehicles/machines stop working
6. Daydream– an informal word which means a very stupid person
7. Breakdown– missing home and family very much
8. Output– do something to an excessive degree
II. Phrasal Verbs
A phrasal verb is a verb followed by a preposition or an adverb. Its meaning
is often different from the meanings of its parts. Compare the meanings of
the verbs get on and run away in (a) and (b) below. You can easily guess their
meanings in (a) but in (b) they have special meanings.
(a) • She got on at Agra when the bus stopped for breakfast.
• Dev Anand ran away from home when he was a teenager.
(b) • She’s eager to get on in life. (succeed)
• The visitors ran away with the match. (won easily)
2019-20
From the Diary of Anne Frank
3. Blockhead
55Some phrasal verbs have three parts: a verb followed by an adverb and a
preposition.
(c) Our car ran out of petrol just outside the city limits.
(d) The government wants to reach out to the people with this new
campaign.
1. The text you’ve just read has a number of phrasal verbs commonly
used in English. Look up the following in a dictionary for their
meanings (under the entry for the italicised word).
(i) plunge (right) in(iii) ramble on
(ii) kept back(iv) get along with
First Flight
2. Now find the sentences in the lesson that have the phrasal verbs
given below. Match them with their meanings. (You have already
found out the meanings of some of them.) Are their meanings the
same as that of their parts? (Note that two parts of a phrasal verb
may occur separated in the text.)
56
(i) plunge in
(ii) kept back
(iii) move up
(iv) ramble on
(v) get along with
(vi) calm down
(vii) stay in
(viii) make up for
(ix) hand in
– speak or write without focus
– stay indoors
– make (them) remain quiet
– have a good relationship with
– give an assignment (homework) to a person in
authority (the teacher)
– compensate
– go straight to the topic
– go to the next grade
– not promoted
III. Idioms
Idioms are groups of words with a fixed order, and a particular meaning,
different from the meanings of each of their words put together. (Phrasal
verbs can also be idioms; they are said to be ‘idiomatic’ when their meaning
is unpredictable.) For example, do you know what it means to ‘meet one’s
match’ in English? It means to meet someone who is as good as oneself, or
even better, in some skill or quality. Do you know what it means to ‘let the
cat out of the bag’? Can you guess?
1. Here are a few sentences from the text which have idiomatic
expressions. Can you say what each means? (You might want to
consult a dictionary first.)
(i) Our entire class is quaking in its boots.
(ii) Until then, we keep telling each other not to lose heart.
2019-20(iii) Mr Keesing was annoyed with me for ages because I talked so much.
(iv) Mr Keesing was trying to play a joke on me with this ridiculous
subject, but I’d make sure the joke was on him.
2. Here are a few more idiomatic expressions that occur in the text.
Try to use them in sentences of your own.
(i) caught my eye(iii) laugh ourselves silly
(ii) he’d had enough(iv) can’t bring myself to
IV. Do you know how to use a dictionary to find out the meanings of idiomatic
expressions? Take, for example, the expression caught my eye in the story.
Where — under which word — would you look for it in the dictionary?
Look for it under the first word. But if the first word is a ‘grammatical’ word
like a, the, for, etc., then take the next word. That is, look for the first
‘meaningful’ word in the expression. In our example, it is the word caught.
But you won’t find caught in the dictionary, because it is the past tense of
catch. You’ll find caught listed under catch. So you must look under catch for
the expression caught my eye. Which other expressions with catch are listed
in your dictionary?
Note that a dictionary entry usually first gives the meanings of the word
itself, and then gives a list of idiomatic expressions using that word. For
example, study this partial entry for the noun ‘eye’ from the Oxford Advanced
Learner’s Dictionary, 2005.
57
Eye
• Part of Body 1 [C] either of the two organs on the face that you see
with: The suspect has dark hair and green eyes.
• Ability to See 3 [sing.] the ability to see: A surgeon needs a good eye
and a steady hand.
• Way of Seeing 4 [C, usually sing.] a particular way of seeing sth: He
looked at the design with the eye of an engineer.
• Of Needle 5 [C] the hole in the end of a needle that you put the thread
through.
IDM be all eyes to be watching sb/sth carefully and with a lot of interest
before/in front of sb’s (very) eyes in sb’s presence; in front of sb: He had
seen his life’s work destroyed before his very eyes. Be up to your eyes in
sth to have a lot of sth to deal with: We’re up to our eyes in work.
2019-20
From the Diary of Anne Frank
• NounYou have read the expression ‘not to lose heart’ in this text. Now find
out the meanings of the following expressions using the word ‘heart’.Use
each of them in a sentence of your own.
1. break somebody’s heart
2. close/dear to heart
3. from the (bottom of your) heart
4. have a heart
5. have a heart of stone
6. your heart goes out to somebody
V. Contracted Forms
When we speak, we use ‘contracted forms’ or short forms such as these:
can’t (for can not or cannot)
I’d (for I would or I had)
she’s (for she is)
First Flight
Notice that contracted forms are also written with an apostrophe to show a
shortening of the spelling of not, would, or is as in the above example.
Writing a diary is like speaking to oneself. Plays (and often, novels) also have
speech in written form. So we usually come across contracted forms in
diaries, plays and novels.
1. Make a list of the contracted forms in the text. Rewrite them as full
forms of two words.
For example:
I’ve = I have
58
2. We have seen that some contracted forms can stand for two different
full forms:
I’d = I had or I would
Find in the text the contracted forms that stand for two different
full forms, and say what these are.
Here is an extract adapted from a one-act play. In this extract, angry neighbours
who think Joe the Inventor’s new spinning machine will make them lose their
jobs come to destroy Joe’s model of the machine.
You’ve just seen how contracted forms can make a written text sound like actual
speech. Try to make this extract sound more like a real conversation by changing
some of the verbs back into contracted forms. Then speak out the lines.
[The door is flung open, and several men tramp in. They carry sticks, and one
of them, HOB, has a hammer.]
MOB: Now where is your husband, mistress?
MARY: In his bed. He is sick, and weary. You would not harm him!
2019-20HOB
: We are going to smash his evil work to pieces. Where is the
machine?
SECOND : On the table yonder.
MAN
HOB
: Then here is the end of it!
[HOB smashes the model. MARY screams.]
HOB: And now for your husband!
MARY: Neighbours, he is a sick man and almost a cripple. You would not
hurt him!
HOB: He is planning to take away our daily bread… We will show him
what we think of him and his ways!
MARY: You have broken his machine… You have done enough…
Now you know what a diary is and how to keep one. Can you keep a diary for a
week recording the events that occur? You may share your diary with your
class, if you wish to. Use the following hints to write your diary.
• Though your diary is very private, write as if you are writing for someone else.
• Present your thoughts in a convincing manner.
• Use words that convey your feelings, and words that ‘paint pictures’ for the
reader. Be brief.
59
‘Diary language’ has some typical features such as subjectless sentences (Got
up late in the morning), sentence fragments without subjects or verbs (…too
bad, boring, not good), contracted forms (they’re, I’ve, can’t, didn’t, etc.), and
everyday expressions which people use in speech. Remember not to use such
language in more formal kinds of writing.
Summary
This entry in the diary has been made on
by
who told Pepys about the fire was called
. The person
. She called at
. Pepys rose again at
the morning. Pepys went back to sleep because
in the morning. By then about
down. The fire had spread to
to the
in
houses had been burned
by London Bridge. Pepys then walked
along with Sir J. Robinson’s
2019-20
.
From the Diary of Anne Frank
Your teacher will read out an extract from The Diary of Samuel Pepys (given on
the next page) about the great fire of London. As you listen complete this summary
of the happenings.WHAT WE HAVE DONE
1.Diary writing is one of the best ways to practise writing. Students do not have to
think up or imagine what to write about; they only have to find words to write
about what has happened. Initiate your students into the habit of keeping a diary.
2.Anne Frank’s diary became a public document after World War II. Discuss with your
students diaries which became historical documents, such as Samuel Pepys’s diary.
You may draw students’ attention to different types of diaries, e.g. private diary,
general diary. Army officers, businessmen, doctors, executives, lawyers, motorists,
police officers keep a general diary to record events that happen during the day
and events that are scheduled for the day, such as appointments, meetings, things
to be done, etc.
3.Passage for listening exercise:
First Flight
The Great Fire of London [1666]
60
September 2nd (Lord’s Day). Jane called us up about three in the morning,
to tell us of a great fire they saw in the city. So I rose and slipped on my
nightgown, and went to her window, and thought it to be on the backside
of Marke-Lane at the farthest; but being unused to such fire as followed,
I thought it far enough off, and so went to bed again and to sleep.
About seven rose again to dress myself, and then looked out of the
window, and saw the fire not so much as it was and further off. By and by
Jane comes and tells me that she hears that above 300 houses have
been burned down tonight by the fire we saw, and that it is now burning
down all Fish Street, by London Bridge.
So I made myself ready presently, and walked to the Tower, and there got
up upon one of the high places, Sir J. Robinson’s little son going up with
me; and there I did see the houses at that end of the bridge all on fire,
and an infinite great fire on this and the other side of the bridge.
[From The Diary of Samuel Pepys ]
WHAT YOU CAN DO
After they have completed the lesson, including the writing exercise, students can be
asked to make a diary jotting for the previous day. Perhaps you could also write a diary
entry describing what happened in school/class on the previous day, to share with the
class — try and make it amusing and interesting! Collect students’ pages (they may be
allowed to sign their names or make it anonymous, as they wish) and put them up on
the class notice board, together with your page, for everyone to read.
2019-20Amanda!
Every child feels that she/he is controlled and instructed not to do
one thing or another. You too may feel that your freedom is curtailed.
Write down some of the things you want to do, but your parents/
elders do not allow you to. To read the poem aloud, form pairs,
each reading alternate stanzas. You are in for a surprise!
Don’t bite your nails, Amanda!
Don’t hunch your shoulders, Amanda!
Stop that slouching and sit up straight,
Amanda!
(There is a languid, emerald sea,
where the sole inhabitant is me—
a mermaid, drifting blissfully.)
Did you finish your homework, Amanda?
Did you tidy your room, Amanda?
I thought I told you to clean your shoes,
Amanda!
(I am an orphan, roaming the street.
I pattern soft dust with my hushed, bare feet.
The silence is golden, the freedom is sweet.)
Don’t eat that chocolate, Amanda!
Remember your acne, Amanda!
Will you please look at me when I’m speaking to you,
Amanda!
2019-20(I am Rapunzel, I have not a care;
life in a tower is tranquil and rare;
I’ll certainly never let down my bright hair!)
Stop that sulking at once, Amanda!
You’re always so moody, Amanda!
Anyone would think that I nagged at you,
Amanda!
ROBIN KLEIN
First Flight
languid: relaxed
62
drifting: moving slowly
pattern: make patterns
tranquil: calm
1. How old do you think Amanda is? How do you know this?
2. Who do you think is speaking to her?
3. Why are Stanzas 2, 4 and 6 given in parenthesis?
4. Who is the speaker in Stanzas 2, 4 and 6? Do you think this speaker is
listening to the speaker in Stanzas 1, 3, 5, and 7?
5. What could Amanda do if she were a mermaid?
6. Is Amanda an orphan? Why does she say so?
7. Do you know the story of Rapunzel? Why does she want to be Rapunzel?
8. What does the girl yearn for? What does this poem tell you about Amanda?
9. Read the last stanza. Do you think Amanda is sulking and is moody?
2019-20BEFORE YOU READ
• How do we judge the people around us — by their money, wealth
and possessions? Or is there something of more enduring value
to look for in a person?
• This story is a sensitive account of how a poor young girl is
judged by her classmates. Wanda Petronski is a young Polish
girl who goes to school with other American children in an American
town. These other children see Wanda as ‘different’ in many
ways. Can you guess how they treat her?
• Read the information in the box below. Find out more about this
community (or about a related topic) from an encyclopedia, or
the Internet.
The Polish-American Community
in the United States
The first Polish immigrants arrived in America in 1608, but
the largest wave of Polish immigration occurred in the early
twentieth century, when more than one million Poles migrated
to the United States. The Polish State did not exist at that
time, and the immigrants were identified according to their
country of origin rather than to ethnicity. They were identified
as Russian Poles, German Poles and Austrian Poles.
One of the most notable Polish-American communities
is in Chicago and its suburbs; so Chicago is sometimes called
the second largest ‘Polish’ city in the world, next only to
Warsaw, the capital of Poland. Polish-Americans were
sometimes discriminated against in the United States, as
were the Irish, Italians, and Jews.
According to the United States 2000 Census, 667,414
Americans of age five years and older reported Polish as the
language spoken at home, which is about 1.4 per cent of
the people who speak languages other than English, or
0.25 per cent of the U.S. population.
2019-20First Flight
64
T ODAY , Monday, Wanda Petronski was not in her
seat. But nobody, not even Peggy and Madeline, the
girls who started all the fun, noticed her absence.
Usually Wanda sat in the seat next to the last seat
in the last row in Room Thirteen. She sat in the
corner of the room where the rough boys who did
not make good marks sat, the corner of the room
where there was most scuffling of feet, most roars
of laughter when anything funny was said, and most
mud and dirt on the floor.
Wanda did not sit there because she was rough
and noisy. On the contrary, she was very quiet and
rarely said anything at all. And nobody had ever
heard her laugh out loud. Sometimes she twisted
her mouth into a crooked sort of smile, but that
was all.
Nobody knew exactly why Wanda sat in that seat,
unless it was because she came all the way from
Boggins Heights and her feet were usually caked
with dry mud. But no one really thought much
about Wanda Petronski, once she sat in the corner
of the room.
The time when they thought about Wanda was
outside of school hours — at noon-time when they
were coming back to school or in the morning early
before school began, when groups of two or three,
or even more, would be talking and laughing on
their way to the school yard.
Then, sometimes, they waited for Wanda — to
have fun with her.
The next day, Tuesday, Wanda was not in school,
either. And nobody noticed her absence again.
But on Wednesday, Peggy and Maddie, who sat
down front with other children who got good marks
and who didn’t track in a whole lot of mud, did
notice that Wanda wasn’t there. Peggy was the most
popular girl in school. She was pretty, she had
many pretty clothes and her hair was curly. Maddie
was her closest friend. The reason Peggy and Maddie
noticed Wanda’s absence was because Wanda had
made them late to school. They had waited and
2019-20
scuffling of feet
noisy, dragging
movements of the
feet on the groundwaited for Wanda, to have some fun with her, and
she just hadn’t come.
They often waited for Wanda Petronski — to have
fun with her.
Oral Comprehension Check
1. Where in the classroom does Wanda sit and why?
2. Where does Wanda live? What kind of a place do you think it is?
3. When and why do Peggy and Maddie notice Wanda’s absence?
4. What do you think “to have fun with her” means?
2019-20
didn’t hang right
didn’t fit properly
65
hopscotch
a game in which
children hop into and
over squares marked
on the ground
nudge
a gentle push
The Hundred Dresses –I
Wanda Petronski. Most of the children in Room
Thirteen didn’t have names like that. They had
names easy to say, like Thomas, Smith or Allen.
There was one boy named Bounce, Willie Bounce,
and people thought that was funny, but not funny
in the same way that Petronski was.
Wanda didn’t have any friends. She came to
school alone and went home alone. She always
wore a faded blue dress that didn’t hang right. It
was clean, but it looked as though it had never
been ironed properly. She didn’t have any friends,
but a lot of girls talked to her. Sometimes, they
surrounded her in the school yard as she stood
watching the little girls play hopscotch on the worn
hard ground.
“Wanda,” Peggy would say in a most courteous
manner as though she were talking to Miss Mason.
“Wanda,” she’d say, giving one of her friends a nudge,
“tell us. How many dresses did you say you had
hanging up in your closet?”First Flight
66
“A hundred,” Wanda would say.
“A hundred!” exclaimed all the little girls
incredulously, and the little ones would stop playing
hopscotch and listen.
“Yeah, a hundred, all lined up,” said Wanda.
Then her thin lips drew together in silence.
“What are they like? All silk, I bet,” said Peggy.
“Yeah, all silk, all colours.”
“Velvet, too?”
“Yeah, velvet too. A hundred dresses,” Wanda
would repeat stolidly. “All lined up in my closet.”
Then they’d let her go. And then before she’d
gone very far, they couldn’t help bursting into
shrieks and peals of laughter.
A hundred dresses! Obviously, the only dress
Wanda had was the blue one she wore every day. So
why did she say she had a hundred? What a story!
“How many shoes did you say you had?”
“Sixty pairs. All lined up in my closet.”
Cries of exaggerated politeness greeted this. “All
alike?”
“Oh, no. Every pair is different. All colours. All
lined up.”
Peggy, who had thought up this game, and
Maddie, her inseparable friend, were always the
last to leave. Finally Wanda would move up the
street, her eyes dull and her mouth closed, hitching
her left shoulder every now and then in the funny
way she had, finishing the walk to school alone.
Peggy was not really cruel. She protected small
children from bullies. And she cried for hours if she
saw an animal mistreated. If anybody had said to
her, “Don’t you think that is a cruel way to treat
Wanda?” she would have been very surprised. Cruel?
Why did the girl say she had a hundred dresses?
Anybody could tell that that was a lie. Why did she
want to lie? And she wasn’t just an ordinary person,
else why did she have a name like that? Anyway,
they never made her cry.
As for Maddie, this business of asking Wanda
every day how many dresses and how many hats,
2019-20
incredulously
showing
unwillingness to
believe
stolidly
not showing any
feeling
bullies
those who use their
strength or power to
frighten weaker
peopleand how many this and that she had was bothering
her. Maddie was poor herself. She usually wore
somebody’s hand-me-down clothes. Thank goodness,
she didn’t live up on Boggins Heights or have a
funny name.
Sometimes, when Peggy was asking Wanda those
questions in that mocking polite voice, Maddie felt
embarrassed and studied the marbles in the palm
of her hand, rolling them around and saying nothing
herself. Not that she felt sorry for Wanda, exactly.
She would never have paid any attention to Wanda
if Peggy hadn’t invented the dresses game. But
suppose Peggy and all the others started in on her
next? She wasn’t as poor as Wanda, perhaps, but
she was poor. Of course she would have more sense
than to say she had a hundred dresses. Still she
would not like for them to begin on her. She wished
Peggy would stop teasing Wanda Petronski.
hand-me-down
clothes
old clothes, handed
down by someone
else
mocking
here, false; meant
to make fun of
embarrassed
ashamed
Oral Comprehension Check
1. In what way was Wanda different from the other children?
2. Did Wanda have a hundred dresses? Why do you think she said
she did?
3. Why is Maddie embarrassed by the questions Peggy asks Wanda? Is
she also like Wanda, or is she different?
2019-20
The Hundred Dresses –I
Today, even though they had been late to school,
Maddie was glad she had not had to make fun of
Wanda. She worked her arithmetic problems absent-
mindedly. “Eight times eight — let’s see…” She
wished she had the nerve to write Peggy a note,
because she knew she never would have the courage
to speak right out to Peggy, to say, “Hey, Peg, let’s
stop asking Wanda how many dresses she has.”
When she finished her arithmetic she did start a
note to Peggy. Suddenly she paused and shuddered.
She pictured herself in the school yard, a new target
for Peggy and the girls. Peggy might ask her where
she got the dress that she had on, and Maddie
would have to say it was one of Peggy’s old ones
that Maddie’s mother had tried to disguise with
67
target
here, a person
deliberately chosen
for attackFirst Flight
68
new trimmings so no one in Room Thirteen would
recognise it.
If only Peggy would decide of her own accord to
stop having fun with Wanda. Oh, well! Maddie ran
her hand through her short blonde hair as though to
push the uncomfortable thoughts away. What
difference did it make? Slowly Maddie tore into bits
the note she had started. She was Peggy’s best friend,
and Peggy was the best-liked girl in the whole room.
Peggy could not possibly do anything that was really
wrong, she thought.
As for Wanda, she was just some girl who lived
up on Boggins Heights and stood alone in the school
yard. She scarcely ever said anything to anybody.
The only time she talked was in the school yard about
her hundred dresses. Maddie remembered her telling
about one of her dresses, pale blue with coloured
trimmings. And she remembered another that was
brilliant jungle green with a red sash. “You’d look
like a Christmas tree in that,” the girls had said in
pretended
pretended admiration.
Thinking about Wanda and her hundred dresses not real
all lined up in the closet, Maddie began to wonder
who was going to win the drawing and colouring
contest. For girls, this contest consisted of designing
dresses and for boys, of designing motorboats.
Probably Peggy would win the girls’ medal. Peggy drew
better than anyone else in the room. At least, that’s
what everybody thought. She could copy a picture in
a magazine or some film star’s head so that you could
almost tell who it was. Oh, Maddie was sure Peggy
would win. Well, tomorrow the teacher was going to
announce the winners. Then they’d know.
The next day it was drizzling. Maddie and Peggy drizzling
hurried to school under Peggy’s umbrella. Naturally, a very light rain was
falling
on a day like this, they didn’t wait for Wanda
Petronski on the corner of Oliver Street, the street
that far, far away, under the railroad tracks and up
the hill, led to Boggins Heights. Anyway, they
weren’t taking chances on being late today, because
today was important.
2019-20“Do you think Miss Mason will announce the
winners today?” asked Peggy.
“Oh, I hope so, the minute we get in,” said
Maddie. “Of course, you’ll win, Peg.”
“Hope so,” said Peggy eagerly.
The minute they entered the classroom, they
stopped short and gasped. There were drawings all
over the room, on every ledge and windowsill, dazzling
colours and brilliant, lavish designs, all drawn on lavish
great sheets of wrapping paper. There must have been very grand
a hundred of them, all lined up. These must be the
drawings for the contest. They were! Everybody
stopped and whistled or murmured admiringly.
As soon as the class had assembled, Miss Mason
announced the winners. Jack Beggles had won for
the boys, she said, and his design for an outboard
motor was on exhibition in Room Twelve, along with
the sketches by all the other boys.
“As for the girls,” she said, “although just one or
two sketches were submitted by most, one girl —
and Room Thirteen should be proud of her — this
one girl actually drew one hundred designs — all
different and all beautiful. In the opinion of the
judges, any one of the drawings is worthy of winning
the prize. I am very happy to say that Wanda
Petronski is the winner of the girls’ medal.
69
The Hundred Dresses –I
2019-20First Flight
70
Unfortunately, Wanda has been absent from school
for some days and is not here to receive the
applause that is due to her. Let us hope she will be
back tomorrow. Now class, you may file around the
room quietly and look at her exquisite drawings.”
The children burst into applause, and even the
boys were glad to have a chance to stamp on the
floor, put their fingers in their mouths and whistle,
though they were not interested in dresses.
“Look, Peg,” whispered Maddie. “There’s that blue
one she told us about. Isn’t it beautiful?”
“Yes,” said Peggy, “And here’s that green one.
Boy, and I thought I could draw.”
exquisite
extremely beautiful
and well-made
burst into
applause
suddenly and
spontaneously
clapped hands
Oral Comprehension Check
1. Why didn’t Maddie ask Peggie to stop teasing Wanda? What was she
afraid of?
2. Who did Maddie think would win the drawing contest? Why?
3. Who won the drawing contest? What had the winner drawn?
1. How is Wanda seen as different by the other girls? How do they treat her?
2. How does Wanda feel about the dresses game? Why does she say that she
has a hundred dresses?
3. Why does Maddie stand by and not do anything? How is she different from
Peggy? (Was Peggy’s friendship important to Maddie? Why? Which lines in
the text tell you this?)
4. What does Miss Mason think of Wanda’s drawings? What do the children
think of them? How do you know?
2019-20I. Look at these sentences
(a) She sat in the corner of the room where the rough boys who did not
make good marks sat, the corner of the room where there was most
scuffling of feet, ...
(b) The time when they thought about Wanda was outside of school hours ...
These italicised clauses help us to identify a set of boys, a place, and a time.
They are answers to the questions ‘What kind of rough boys?’ ‘Which corner
did she sit in?’ and ‘What particular time outside of school hours?’ They are
‘defining’ or ‘restrictive’ relative clauses. (Compare them with the ‘non-
defining’ relative clauses discussed in Unit 1.)
Combine the following to make sentences like those above.
1. This is the bus (what kind of bus?). It goes to Agra. (use which or that)
2. I would like to buy (a) shirt (which shirt?). (The) shirt is in the shop window.
(use which or that)
3. You must break your fast at a particular time (when?). You see the moon
in the sky. (use when)
4. Find a word (what kind of word?). It begins with the letter Z. (use which
or that)
5. Now find a person (what kind of person). His or her name begins with the
letter Z. (use whose)
71
6. Then go to a place (what place?). There are no people whose name begins
with Z in that place. (use where)
II. The Narrative Voice
Thank goodness, she did not live up on Boggins Heights or have a funny
name.
Whose thoughts do the words ‘Thank goodness’ express? Maddie’s, who is
grateful that although she is poor, she is yet not as poor as Wanda, or as
‘different’. (So she does not get teased; she is thankful about that.)
1. Here are two other sentences from the story. Can you say whose
point of view the italicised words express?
(i) But on Wednesday, Peggy and Maddie, who sat down front with other
children who got good marks and who didn’t track in a whole lot of
mud, did notice that Wanda wasn’t there.
(ii) Wanda Petronski. Most of the children in Room Thirteen didn’t have
names like that. They had names easy to say, like Thomas, Smith
or Allen.
2019-20
The Hundred Dresses –I
This story is in the ‘third person’ that is, the narrator is not a participant in
the story. But the narrator often seems to tell the story from the point of
view of one of the characters in the story. For example, look at the italicised
words in this sentence2. Can you find other such sentences in the story? You can do this
after you read the second part of the story as well.
III. Look at this sentence. The italicised adverb expresses an opinion or point
of view.
Obviously, the only dress Wanda had was the blue one she wore every
day. (This was obvious to the speaker.)
First Flight
Other such adverbs are apparently, evidently, surprisingly, possibly,
hopefully, incredibly, luckily. Use these words appropriately in the
blanks in the sentences below. (You may use a word more than once,
and more than one word may be appropriate for a given blank.)
1., he finished his work on time.
2., it will not rain on the day of the match.
3., he had been stealing money from his employer.
4. Television is
society.
to blame for the increase in violence in
5. The children will
6. I can’t
learn from their mistakes.
lend you that much money.
72
been watching the house for many days.
7. The thief had
8. The thief
9.
escaped by bribing the jailor.
, no one had suggested this before.
10. The water was
hot.
2019-20WHILE the class was circling the room, the monitor
from the principal’s office brought Miss Mason a note.
Miss Mason read it several times and studied it
thoughtfully for a while. Then she clapped her hands.
“Attention, class. Everyone back to their seat.”
When the shuffling of feet had stopped and the
room was still and quiet, Miss Mason said, “I have a
letter from Wanda’s father that I want to read to you.”
Miss Mason stood there a moment and the
silence in the room grew tense and expectant. The
teacher adjusted her glasses slowly and deliberately.
Her manner indicated that what was coming — this
letter from Wanda’s father — was a matter of great
importance. Everybody listened closely as Miss listened closely
listened with
Mason read the brief note.
Dear Teacher:
My Wanda will not come to your school any more. Jake
also. Now we move away to big city. No more holler ‘Pollack’.
No more ask why funny name. Plenty of funny names in
the big city.
Yours truly,
Jan Petronski
A deep silence met the reading of this letter.
Miss Mason took off her glasses, blew on them and
wiped them on her soft white handkerchief. Then
she put them on again and looked at the class.
When she spoke her voice was very low.
“I am sure that none of the boys and girls in
Room Thirteen would purposely and deliberately
hurt anyone’s feelings because his or her name
happened to be a long, unfamiliar one. I prefer
2019-20
attentionFirst Flight
74
to think that what was said was said in
thoughtlessness. I know that all of you feel the way
I do, that this is a very unfortunate thing to have
happened — unfortunate and sad, both. And I want
you all to think about it.”
The first period was a study period. Maddie tried
to prepare her lessons, but she could not put her
mind on her work. She had a very sick feeling in the
bottom of her stomach. True, she had not enjoyed
listening to Peggy ask Wanda how many dresses she
had in her closet, but she had said nothing. She had
stood by silently, and that was just as bad as what
Peggy had done. Worse. She was a coward. At least
Peggy hadn’t considered they were being mean but
she, Maddie, had thought they were doing wrong.
She could put herself in Wanda’s shoes.
Goodness! Wasn’t there anything she could do?
If only she could tell Wanda she hadn’t meant to
hurt her feelings. She turned around and stole a
glance at Peggy, but Peggy did not look up. She
seemed to be studying hard. Well, whether Peggy
felt badly or not, she, Maddie, had to do something.
She had to find Wanda Petronski. Maybe she had
not yet moved away. Maybe Peggy would climb the
Heights with her, and they would tell Wanda she
had won the contest, that they thought she was
smart and the hundred dresses were beautiful.
Oral Comprehension Check
1.
2.
3.
4.
What did Mr Petronski’s letter say?
Is Miss Mason angry with the class, or is she unhappy and upset?
How does Maddie feel after listening to the note from Wanda’s father?
What does Maddie want to do?
2019-202019-20
damp and dismal
wet and sad (here,
expressing a state of
hopelessness)
75
The Hundred Dresses –II
When school was dismissed in the afternoon,
Peggy said, with pretended casualness, “Hey, let’s
go and see if that kid has left town or not.”
So Peggy had had the same idea! Maddie glowed.
Peg was really all right.
The two girls hurried out of the building, up the
street toward Boggins Heights, the part of town that
wore such a forbidding air on this kind of a
November afternoon, drizzly, damp and dismal.
“Well, at least,” said Peggy gruffly, “I never did
call her a foreigner or make fun of her name. I
never thought she had the sense to know we were
making fun of her anyway. I thought she was too
dumb. And gee, look how she can draw!”
Maddie could say nothing. All she hoped was that
they would find Wanda. She wanted to tell her that
they were sorry they had picked on her, and how
wonderful the whole school thought she was, and
please, not to move away and everybody would be nice.
She and Peggy would fight anybody who was not nice.
The two girls hurried on. They hoped to get to
the top of the hill before dark.
“I think that’s where the Petronskis live,” said
Maddie, pointing to a little white house. Wisps of
old grass stuck up here and there along the pathway
like thin kittens. The house and its sparse little
yard looked shabby but clean. It reminded Maddie
of Wanda’s one dress, her faded blue cotton dress,
shabby but clean.
There was not a sign of life about the house.
Peggy knocked firmly on the door, but there was no
answer. She and Maddie went around to the back
yard and knocked there. Still there was no answer.First Flight
76
There was no doubt about it. The Petronskis were
gone. How could they ever make amends?
They turned slowly and made their way back
down the hill.
“Well, anyway,” said Peggy, “she’s gone now, so
what can we do? Besides, when I was asking her
about all her dresses, she probably was getting good
ideas for her drawings. She might not even have
won the contest, otherwise.”
Maddie turned this idea carefully over in her
head, for if there were anything in it she would not
have to feel so badly. But that night she could not
get to sleep. She thought about Wanda and her faded
blue dress and the little house she had lived in. And
she thought of the glowing picture those hundred
dresses made — all lined up in the classroom. At
last Maddie sat up in bed and pressed her forehead
tight in her hands and really thought. This was the
hardest thinking she had ever done. After a long,
long time, she reached an important conclusion.
She was never going to stand by and say
nothing again.
If she ever heard anybody picking on someone
because they were funny looking or because they
had strange names, she’d speak up. Even if it meant
losing Peggy’s friendship. She had no way of making
things right with Wanda, but from now on she would
never make anybody else that unhappy again.
(to) make amends
to show that one is
sorry by doing
something good
picking on
someone
treating someone
unkindly, unfairly
criticising them
Oral Comprehension Check
1. What excuses does Peggy think up for her behaviour? Why?
2. What are Maddie’s thoughts as they go to Boggins Heights?
3. Why does Wanda’s house remind Maddie of Wanda’s blue dress?
2019-204. What does Maddie think hard about? What important decision
does she come to?
2019-20
77
The Hundred Dresses –II
On Saturday Maddie spent the afternoon with
Peggy. They were writing a letter to Wanda Petronski.
It was just a friendly letter telling about the contest
and telling Wanda she had won. They told her how
pretty her drawings were. And they asked her if
she liked where she was living and if she liked her
new teacher. They had meant to say they were sorry,
but it ended up with their just writing a friendly
letter, the kind they would have written to any good
friend, and they signed it with lots of X’s for love.
They mailed the letter to Boggins Heights, writing
‘Please Forward’ on the envelope.
Days passed and there was no answer, but the
letter did not come back, so maybe Wanda had
received it. Perhaps she was so hurt and angry she
was not going to answer. You could not blame her.
Weeks went by and still Wanda did not answer.
Peggy had begun to forget the whole business, and
Maddie put herself to sleep at night making speeches
about Wanda, defending her from great crowds of
girls who were trying to tease her with, “How many
dresses have you got?” And before Wanda could press
her lips together in a tight line, the way she did
before answering, Maddie would cry out, “Stop!”
Then everybody would feel ashamed the way she
used to feel.
Now it was Christmas time and there was snow
on the ground. Christmas bells and a small tree
decorated the classroom. On the last day of school
before the holidays, the teacher showed the class a
letter she had received that morning.“You remember Wanda Petronski, the gifted little
artist who won the drawing contest? Well, she has
written me, and I am glad to know where she lives,
because now I can send her medal. I want to read
her letter to you.”
The class sat up with a sudden interest and
listened intently.
Dear Miss Mason,
First Flight
How are you and Room Thirteen? Please tell the girls they
can keep those hundred dresses, because in my new house
I have a hundred new ones, all lined up in my closet. I’d
like that girl Peggy to have the drawing of the green dress
with the red trimming, and her friend Maddie to have the
blue one. For Christmas, I miss that school and my new
teacher does not equalise with you. Merry Christmas to
you and everybody.
78
Yours truly,
Wanda Petronski
On the way home from school Maddie and Peggy
held their drawings very carefully. All the houses had
wreaths and holly in the windows. Outside the grocery
store, hundreds of Christmas trees were stacked, and
in the window, candy peppermint sticks and
cornucopias of shiny transparent paper were strung. cornucopias
The air smelled like Christmas and light shining decorative
containers (usually
everywhere reflected different colours on the snow.
full of flowers and
“Boy!” said Peggy, “this shows she really likes fruits)
us. It shows she got our letter and this is her way of
saying that everything’s all right. And that’s that.”
“I hope so,” said Maddie sadly. She felt sad
because she knew she would never see the little
tight-lipped Polish girl again and couldn’t ever really
make things right between them.
She went home and she pinned her drawing
over a torn place in the pink-flowered wallpaper in
the bedroom. The shabby room came alive from
the brilliancy of the colours. Maddie sat down on
her bed and looked at the drawing. She had stood
by and said nothing, but Wanda had been nice to
her, anyway.
2019-20Tears blurred her eyes and she gazed for a long
time at the picture. Then hastily she rubbed her
eyes and studied it intently. The colours in the dress
were so vivid that she had scarcely noticed the face
and head of the drawing. But it looked like her,
Maddie! It really looked like her own mouth. Why it
really looked like her own self! Wanda had really
drawn this for her. Excitedly, she ran over to Peggy’s.
“Peg!” she said, “let me see your picture.”
“What’s the matter?” asked Peggy, as they clattered
up to her room where Wanda’s drawing was lying
face down on the bed. Maddie carefully raised it.
“Look! She drew you. That’s you!” she exclaimed.
And the head and face of this picture did look like
Peggy.
“What did I say!” said Peggy, “She must have
really liked us, anyway.”
“Yes, she must have,” agreed Maddie, and she
blinked away the tears that came every time she
thought of Wanda standing alone in that sunny spot
in the school yard, looking stolidly over at the group
of laughing girls after she had walked off, after she
had said, “Sure, a hundred of them, all lined up.”
1. Why do you think Wanda’s family moved to a different city? Do you think life
there was going to be different for their family?
2. Maddie thought her silence was as bad as Peggy’s teasing. Was she right?
3. Peggy says, “I never thought she had the sense to know we were making fun
of her anyway. I thought she was too dumb. And gee, look how she can
draw!” What led Peggy to believe that Wanda was dumb? Did she change her
opinion later?
2019-20
The Hundred Dresses –II
Oral Comprehension Check
1. What did the girls write to Wanda?
2. Did they get a reply? Who was more anxious for a reply, Peggy or
Maddie? How do you know?
3. How did the girls know that Wanda liked them even though they had
teased her?
794. What important decision did Maddie make? Why did she have to think hard
to do so?
5. Why do you think Wanda gave Maddie and Peggy the drawings of the dresses?
Why are they surprised?
6. Do you think Wanda really thought the girls were teasing her? Why or Why not?
I. Here are thirty adjectives describing human qualities. Discuss them with
your partner and put them in the two word webs (given below) according to
whether you think they show positive or negative qualities. You can consult
a dictionary if you are not sure of the meanings of some of the words. You
may also add to the list the positive or negative ‘pair’ of a given word.
First Flight
kind, sarcastic, courteous, arrogant, insipid, timid, placid, cruel, haughty,
proud, zealous, intrepid, sensitive, compassionate, introverted, stolid,
cheerful, contented, thoughtless, vain, friendly, unforgiving, fashionable,
generous, talented, lonely, determined, creative, miserable, complacent
80
Positive
Negative
2019-20II. What adjectives can we use to describe Peggy, Wanda and Maddie? You
can choose adjectives from the list above. You can also add some of
your own.
1. Peggy
2. Wanda
3. Maddie
III. 1. Find the sentences in the story with the following phrasal verbs.
lined up
thought up
took off
stood by
2. Look up these phrasal verbs in a dictionary to find out if they can be
used in some other way. (Look at the entries for line, think, take
and stand in the dictionary.) Find out what other prepositions can
go with these verbs. What does each of these phrasal verbs mean?
3. Use at least five such phrasal verbs in sentences of your own.
IV. Colours are used to describe feelings, moods and emotions. Match the
following ‘colour expressions’ with a suggested paraphrase.
(i) the Monday morning
blues– feel embarrassed/angry/ashamed
(ii) go red in the face– feel very sick, as if about to vomit
(iii) look green– sadness or depression after a weekend of fun
(iv) the red carpet– the sign or permission to begin an action
(v) blue-blooded– a sign of surrender or acceptance of defeat;
a wish to stop fighting
(vi) a green belt– in an unlawful act; while doing something
wrong
(vii) a blackguard– a photographic print of building plans; a
detailed plan or scheme
(viii) a grey area– land around a town or city
construction is prohibited by law
(ix) a white flag– an area of a subject or a situation where
matters are not very clear
(x) a blueprint– a dishonest person with no sense of right or
wrong
(xi) red-handed– a special welcome
(xii) the green light– of noble birth or from a royal family
81
The Hundred Dresses –II
2019-20
whereRole Play
The story of Wanda Petronski presents many characters engaged in many kinds
of behaviour (teasing, playing, sitting in class…). Form groups. Choose an episode
or episodes from the story. Assign roles to each member of the group from that
episode, and try to act it out like a play, using the words in the story.
First Flight
1. Look again at the letter which Wanda’s father writes to Miss Mason, Wanda’s
teacher. Mr Petronski is not quite aware how to write a formal letter in English.
Can you rewrite it more appropriately? Discuss the following with your partner
before you do so.
The format of a formal letter: How to begin the letter and how to end it; the
language of the letter needs to be formal. (Avoid informal words like “holler”
and fragments like “No more ask why funny name.”) Write complete sentences.
82
2. Are you interested in drawing and painting? Ritu Kumar, one of India’s best
known dress designers, has no formal training in designing. She started by
sketching ideas for her own dresses, and getting them stitched by a tailor.
Ritu’s friends liked her dresses so much that they asked her to design clothes
for them, and even paid her for it!
Imagine you are going to make a career out of your hobby. What sort of
things will you need to learn? Write a paragraph or two on this topic after
consulting an expert or doing reference work on your chosen area.
3. Rewrite a part of the story as if Wanda is telling us her own story.
WHAT WE HAVE DONE
Narrated the story of Wanda Petronski, a poor little Polish girl in an American school,
and how her amazing drawing skills made her classmates feel ashamed about how
they had treated her.
WHAT YOU CAN D O
Help your students conduct a survey in their class to find out about the different talents
that their classmates possess — anything from cooking to painting to singing to gardening.
Divide the class into two equal sections, A and B. Each student from Section A talks
with one student from Section B, and they interview each other for five or ten minutes,
so that at the end of that time all the students have been interviewed. Then about five
students from each section (more if there is time) talk about the talents of the person
they interviewed. Make sure that some of the more ‘marginalised’ students from your
class (each class has some of them) have their moment of ‘fame.’
This exercise can be done after Units 5 and 6 have been completed, so that
students understand the point of the exercise better.
2019-20Animals
The poet tells us that he feels more at home with animals than
humans, whom he finds complicated and false.
I think I could turn and live with animals, they are
so placid and self-contain’d,
I stand and look at them long and long.
They do not sweat and whine about their condition,
They do not lie awake in the dark and weep for their sins,
They do not make me sick discussing their duty to God,
Not one is dissatisfied, not one is demented with
the mania of owning things,
Not one kneels to another, nor to his kind that
lived thousands of years ago,
Not one is respectable or unhappy over the whole earth.
So they show their relations to me and I accept them,
They bring me tokens of myself, they evince
them plainly in their possession
I wonder where they get those tokens,
Did I pass that way huge times ago and negligently drop them?
WALT WHITMAN
[From ‘Song of Myself ’ in Leaves of Grass]
Walt Whitman (1819 – 92) is a major figure in early American poetry. In
an age when all poetry was rhymed and metrical, Whitman made a
break with tradition and wrote a revolutionary new kind of poetry in free
verse. He was a nonconformist in all respects, including his social life.
2019-201. Notice the use of the word ‘turn’ in the first line, “I think I could turn and live
with animals…”. What is the poet turning from?
2. Mention three things that humans do and animals don’t.
3. Do humans kneel to other humans who lived thousands of years ago? Discuss
this in groups.
First Flight
4. What are the ‘tokens’ that the poet says he may have dropped long ago, and
which the animals have kept for him? Discuss this in class. (Hint: Whitman
belongs to the Romantic tradition that includes Rousseau and Wordsworth,
which holds that civilisation has made humans false to their own true nature.
What could be the basic aspects of our nature as living beings that humans
choose to ignore or deny?)
84
English is funny, because...
If the plural of tooth is teeth, why isn’t the plural
of booth beeth?
2019-20BEFORE YOU READ
Activity
Discuss in class
1. What images — of people and of places — come to your mind,
when you think of our country?
2. What parts of India have you lived in, or visited? Can you name
some popular tourist destinations?
3. You may know that apart from the British, the Dutch and the
French, the Portuguese have also played a part in the history of
our country. Can you say which parts of India show French
and Portuguese influences?
4. Can you say which parts of India grow (i) tea, (ii) coffee?
I
A Baker from Goa
This is a pen-portrait of a traditional Goan village baker who still
has an important place in his society.
OUR elders are often heard reminiscing nostalgically
about those good old Portuguese days, the Portuguese
and their famous loaves of bread. Those eaters of loaves
might have vanished but the makers are still there.
We still have amongst us the mixers, the moulders
and those who bake the loaves. Those age-old, time-
tested furnaces still exist. The fire in the furnaces
has not yet been extinguished. The thud and jingle of
2019-20
reminiscing
nostalgically
thinking fondly of
the pastFirst Flight
86
the traditional baker’s bamboo, heralding his arrival
in the morning, can still be heard in some places.
Maybe the father is not alive but the son still carries
on the family profession. These bakers are, even today,
known as pader in Goa.
During our childhood in Goa, the baker used to
be our friend, companion and guide. He used to
come at least twice a day. Once, when he set out in
the morning on his selling round, and then again,
when he returned after emptying his huge basket.
The jingling thud of his bamboo woke us up from
sleep and we ran to meet and greet him. Why was
it so? Was it for the love of the loaf? Not at all. The
loaves were bought by some Paskine or Bastine,
the maid-servant of the house! What we longed for
were those bread-bangles which we chose carefully.
Sometimes it was sweet bread of special make.
The baker made his musical entry on the scene
with the ‘jhang, jhang’ sound of his specially made
bamboo staff. One hand supported the basket on
his head and the other banged the bamboo on the
ground. He would greet the lady of the house with
“Good morning” and then place his basket on the
vertical bamboo. We kids would be pushed aside
with a mild rebuke and the loaves would be delivered
to the servant. But we would not give up. We would
climb a bench or the parapet and peep into the
basket, somehow. I can still recall the typical
fragrance of those loaves. Loaves for the elders and
the bangles for the children. Then we did not even
care to brush our teeth or wash our mouths
properly. And why should we? Who would take the
trouble of plucking the mango-leaf for the
toothbrush? And why was it necessary at all? The
tiger never brushed his teeth. Hot tea could wash
and clean up everything so nicely, after all!
heralding
announcing
rebuke
an expression of
disapproval; a
scolding
fragrance
scent
Oral Comprehension Check
1.
2.
3.
4.
What are the elders in Goa nostalgic about?
Is bread-making still popular in Goa? How do you know?
What is the baker called?
When would the baker come everyday? Why did the children
run to meet him?
2019-20Oral Comprehension Check
1. Match the following. What is a must
(i) as marriage gifts?
(ii) for a party or a feast?
(iii) for a daughter’s engagement?
(iv) for Christmas?
–
–
–
–
87
plump physique
pleasantly fat body
open testimony
public statement
about a character or
quality
cakes and bolinhas
sweet bread called bol
bread
sandwiches
2. What did the bakers wear: (i) in the Portuguese days? (ii) when the
author was young?
3. Who invites the comment — “he is dressed like a pader”? Why?
4. Where were the monthly accounts of the baker recorded?
5. What does a ‘jackfruit -like appearance’ mean?
2019-20
Glimpses of India
Marriage gifts are meaningless without the sweet
bread known as the bol, just as a party or a feast
loses its charm without bread. Not enough can be
said to show how important a baker can be for a
village. The lady of the house must prepare
sandwiches on the occasion of her daughter’s
engagement. Cakes and bolinhas are a must for
Christmas as well as other festivals. Thus, the
presence of the baker’s furnace in the village is
absolutely essential.
The baker or bread-seller of those days had a
peculiar dress known as the kabai. It was a single-
piece long frock reaching down to the knees. In our
childhood we saw bakers wearing a shirt and
trousers which were shorter than full-length ones
and longer than half pants. Even today, anyone
who wears a half pant which reaches just below
the knees invites the comment that he is dressed
like a pader!
The baker usually collected his bills at the end
of the month. Monthly accounts used to be recorded
on some wall in pencil. Baking was indeed a
profitable profession in the old days. The baker and
his family never starved. He, his family and his
servants always looked happy and prosperous. Their
plump physique was an open testimony to this. Even
today any person with a jackfruit-like physical
appearance is easily compared to a baker.1. Which of these statements are correct?
(i) The pader was an important person in the village in old times.
(ii) Paders still exist in Goan villages.
(iii) The paders went away with the Portuguese.
(iv) The paders continue to wear a single-piece long frock.
(v) Bread and cakes were an integral part of Goan life in the old days.
(vi) Traditional bread-baking is still a very profitable business.
(vii) Paders and their families starve in the present times.
2. Is bread an important part of Goan life? How do you know this?
3. Tick the right answer. What is the tone of the author when he says the following?
(i) The thud and the jingle of the traditional baker’s bamboo can still be
heard in some places. (nostalgic, hopeful, sad)
First Flight
(ii) Maybe the father is not alive but the son still carries on the family
profession. (nostalgic, hopeful, sad)
(iii) I still recall the typical fragrance of those loaves. (nostalgic, hopeful,
naughty)
88(vi) The baker and his family never starved. They always looked happy and
prosperous. (matter-of-fact, hopeful, sad)
(iv) The tiger never brushed his teeth. Hot tea could wash and clean up
everything so nicely, after all. (naughty, angry, funny)
(v) Cakes and bolinhas are a must for Christmas as well as other festivals.
(sad, hopeful, matter-of-fact)
I. In this extract, the author talks about traditional bread-baking during his
childhood days. Complete the following table with the help of the clues on
the left. Then write a paragraph about the author's childhood days.
Clues
Author’s childhood days
the way bread was baked
the way the pader sold bread
what the pader wore
when the pader was paid
how the pader looked
2019-20II. 1. Compare the piece from the text (on the left below) with the other piece
on Goan bakers (on the right). What makes the two texts so different?
Are the facts the same? Do both writers give you a picture of the baker?
Our elders are often heard
reminiscing nostalgically about
those good old Portuguese days,
the Portuguese and their famous
loaves of bread. Those eaters of
loaves might have vanished but
the makers are still there. We still
have amongst us the mixers, the
moulders and those who bake the
loaves. Those age-old, time-tested
furnaces still exist. The fire in the
furnaces had not yet been
extinguished. The thud and the
jingle of the traditional baker’s
bamboo, heralding his arrival in
the morning, can still be heard
in some places.
May be the father is not alive
but the son still carries on the
family profession.
After Goa’s liberation, people used
to say nostalgically that the
Portuguese bread vanished with
the paders. But the paders have
managed to survive because they
have perfected the art of door-to-
door delivery service. The paders
pick up the knowledge of bread-
making from traditions in the
family. The leavened, oven-baked
bread is a gift of the Portuguese
to India.
[Adapted from Nandakumar
Kamat’s ‘The Unsung Lives of Goan
Paders’]
89
2. Now find a travel brochure about a place you have visited. Look at the
description in the brochure. Then write your own account, adding details
from your own experience, to give the reader a picture of the place, rather
than an impersonal, factual description.
2. There are a number of craft-based professions which are dying out. Pick one
of the crafts below. Make a group presentation to the class about the skills
required, and the possible reasons for the decline of the craft. Can you
think of ways to revive these crafts?
(i) Pottery
(v) Carpentry
(ii) Batik work(vi) Bamboo weaving
(iii) Dhurri (rug) weaving(vii) Making jute products
(iv) Embroidery(viii) Handloom
2019-20
Glimpses of India
1. In groups, collect information on how bakeries bake bread now and how the
process has changed over time.II
Coorg
First Flight
Coorg is coffee country, famous for its rainforests and spices.
90
MIDWAY between Mysore and the coastal town of
Mangalore sits a piece of heaven that must have
drifted from the kingdom of god. This land of rolling
hills is inhabited by a proud race of martial men,
beautiful women and wild creatures.
Coorg, or Kodagu, the smallest district of
Karnataka, is home to evergreen rainforests, spices
and coffee plantations. Evergreen rainforests cover
thirty per cent of this district. During the monsoons,
it pours enough to keep many visitors away. The
season of joy commences from September and
continues till March. The weather is perfect, with
some showers thrown in for
good measure. The air
breathes of invigorating
coffee. Coffee estates and
colonial bungalows stand
tucked under tree canopies
in prime corners.
The fiercely independent
people of Coorg are possibly
of Greek or Arabic descent.
As one story goes, a part of
Alexander’s army moved
south along the coast and
settled here when return
became impractical. These
people married amongst the
locals and their culture is
apparent in the martial
traditions, marriage and
religious rites, which are
distinct from the Hindu
mainstream. The theory of
Arab origin draws support
Traditional Coorgi dress
from the long, black coat
2019-20
drifted from
been carried along
gently by air
martial
having to do with
war
canopies
roof-like coverings
that form shelters
prime
here, best
mainstream
a tradition which
most people followwith an embroidered waist-belt worn by the Kodavus.
Known as kuppia, it resembles the kuffia worn by
the Arabs and the Kurds.
Coorgi homes have a tradition of hospitality, and
they are more than willing to recount numerous
tales of valour related to their sons and fathers.
The Coorg Regiment is one of the most decorated in
the Indian Army, and the first Chief of the Indian
Army, General Cariappa, was a Coorgi. Even now,
Kodavus are the only people in India permitted to
carry firearms without a licence.
The river, Kaveri, obtains its water from the hills
and forests of Coorg. Mahaseer — a large freshwater
fish — abound in these waters. Kingfishers dive for
their catch, while squirrels and langurs drop
partially eaten fruit for the mischief of enjoying the
splash and the ripple effect in the clear water.
Elephants enjoy being bathed and scrubbed in the
river by their mahouts.
The most laidback individuals become converts
to the life of high-energy adventure with river rafting,
canoeing, rappelling, rock climbing and mountain
tales of valour
stories of courage
and bravery, usually
in war
most decorated
having received the
maximum number
of awards for
bravery in war
laidback
relaxed; not in a hurry
rafting
travelling in a river
in a raft ( a floating
platform made by
tying planks
together)
canoeing
travelling in a river
in a canoe (a large,
narrow boat)
rappelling
going down a cliff by
sliding down a rope
91
Glimpses of India
Basket-seller from Coorg
2019-20First Flight
biking. Numerous walking trails in this region are
a favourite with trekkers.
Birds, bees and butterflies are there to give you
company. Macaques, Malabar squirrels, langurs and
slender loris keep a watchful eye from the tree canopy.
I do, however, prefer to step aside for wild elephants.
The climb to the Brahmagiri hills brings you
into a panoramic view of the entire misty landscape
of Coorg. A walk across the rope bridge leads to the
sixty-four-acre island of Nisargadhama. Running
into Buddhist monks from India’s largest Tibetan
settlement, at nearby Bylakuppe, is a bonus. The
monks, in red, ochre and yellow robes, are amongst
the many surprises that wait to be discovered by
visitors searching for the heart and soul of India,
right here in Coorg.
92
trails
paths created by
walking
panoramic view
a view of a wide
area of land
FACT FILE
How to Reach
Madikeri, the district headquarters, is the only gateway to Coorg. The misty
hills, lush forests and coffee plantations will cast a spell on you. Find a
resort, coffee estate or stay in a home for a truly Coorgi experience.
By Air: The nearest airports are Mangalore (135 km) and Bangalore (260
km). There are flights to Mangalore from Mumbai, and to Bangalore from
Ahmedabad, Chennai, Delhi, Goa, Hyderabad, Kochi, Kolkata, Mumbai and
Pune.
By Rail: The nearest railheads are at Mysore, Mangalore and Hassan.
By Road: There are two routes to Coorg from Bangalore. Both are almost
the same distance (around 250-260 km). The route via Mysore is the most
frequented one. The other route is via Neelamangal, Kunigal,
Chanrayanapatna.
1. Where is Coorg?
2. What is the story about the Kodavu people’s descent?
3. What are some of the things you now know about
(i) the people of Coorg?
(ii) the main crop of Coorg?
(iii) the sports it offers to tourists?
2019-20(iv) the animals you are likely to see in Coorg?
(v) its distance from Bangalore, and how to get there?
4. Here are six sentences with some words in italics. Find phrases from the
text that have the same meaning. (Look in the paragraphs indicated)
(i) During monsoons it rains so heavily that tourists do not visit Coorg. (para 2)
(ii) Some people say that Alexander’s army moved south along the coast
and settled there. (para 3)
(iii) The Coorg people are always ready to tell stories of their sons’ and fathers’
valour. (para 4)
(iv) Even people who normally lead an easy and slow life get smitten by the
high-energy adventure sports of Coorg. (para 6)
(v) The theory of the Arab origin is supported by the long coat with
embroidered waist-belt they wear. (para 3)
(vi) Macaques, Malabar squirrels observe you carefully from the tree canopy.
(para 7)
Collocations
Certain words ‘go together’. Such ‘word friends’ are called collocations. The
collocation of a word is ‘the company it keeps’.
For example, look at the paired sentences and phrases below. Which is a common
collocation, and which one is odd? Strike out the odd sentence or phrase.
(a) • ‘How old are you?’
93
(b) • a pleasant person
• ‘How young are you?’
• a pleasant pillow
1. Here are some nouns from the text.
monks
surprise
experience
weather
tradition
Work with a partner and discuss which of the nouns can collocate with
which of the adjectives given below. The first one has been done for you.
unique
terrible
(i) culture:
unforgettable
serious
ancient
unique culture, ancient culture
(ii) monks:
(iii) surprise:
(iv) experience:
(v) weather:
(vi) tradition
2019-20
wide
sudden
Glimpses of India
culture2. Complete the following phrases from the text. For each phrase, can you
find at least one other word that would fit into the blank?
(i) tales of(ii) coastal
(iii) a piece of(iv) evergreen
(v)
plantations
(vi)
bridge
(vii) wild
You may add your own examples to this list.
First Flight
III
Tea from Assam
94
Pranjol, a youngster from Assam, is Rajvir’s classmate at school
in Delhi. Pranjol’s father is the manager of a tea-garden in Upper
Assam and Pranjol has invited Rajvir to visit his home during the
summer vacation.
“CHAI- GARAM... garam-chai,” a vendor called out in a
high-pitched voice.
He came up to their window and asked,”Chai, sa’ab?”
“Give us two cups,” Pranjol said.
They sipped the steaming hot liquid. Almost
everyone in their compartment was drinking tea too.
“Do you know that over eighty crore cups of tea
are drunk every day throughout the world?” Rajvir said.
“Whew!” exclaimed Pranjol. “Tea really is very
popular.”
The train pulled out of the station. Pranjol buried
his nose in his detective book again. Rajvir too was
an ardent fan of detective stories, but at the moment
he was keener on looking at the beautiful scenery.
It was green, green everywhere. Rajvir had never
seen so much greenery before. Then the soft green
paddy fields gave way to tea bushes.
It was a magnificent view. Against the backdrop
of densely wooded hills a sea of tea bushes stretched
as far as the eye could see. Dwarfing the tiny tea
plants were tall sturdy shade-trees and amidst the
orderly rows of bushes busily moved doll-like figures.
2019-202019-20
95
Glimpses of India
In the distance was an ugly building with smoke
billowing out of tall chimneys.
“Hey, a tea garden!” Rajvir cried excitedly.
Pranjol, who had been born and brought up on
a plantation, didn’t share Rajvir’s excitement.
“Oh, this is tea country now,” he said. “Assam has
the largest concentration of plantations in the world.
You will see enough gardens to last you a lifetime!”
“I have been reading as much as I could about
tea,” Rajvir said. “No one really knows who
discovered tea but there are many legends.”
“What legends?”
“Well, there’s the one about the Chinese emperor
who always boiled water before drinking it. One
day a few leaves of the twigs burning under the pot
fell into the water giving it a delicious flavour. It is
said they were tea leaves.”
“Tell me another!” scoffed Pranjol.
“We have an Indian legend too. Bodhidharma, an
ancient Buddhist ascetic, cut off his eyelids because
he felt sleepy during meditations. Ten tea plants
grew out of the eyelids. The leaves of these plants
when put in hot water and drunk banished sleep.
“Tea was first drunk in China,” Rajvir added,
“as far back as 2700 B.C.! In fact words such as
tea, ‘chai’ and ‘chini’ are from Chinese. Tea came to
Europe only in the sixteenth century and was drunk
more as medicine than as beverage.”
The train clattered into Mariani junction. The
boys collected their luggage and pushed their way
to the crowded platform.
Pranjol’s parents were waiting for them.
Soon they were driving towards Dhekiabari, the
tea-garden managed by Pranjol’s father.
An hour later the car veered sharply off the main
road. They crossed a cattle-bridge and entered
Dhekiabari Tea Estate.
On both sides of the gravel-road were acre upon
acre of tea bushes, all neatly pruned to the same
height. Groups of tea-pluckers, with bamboo baskets
on their backs, wearing plastic aprons, were
plucking the newly sprouted leaves.Pranjol’s father slowed down to allow a tractor,
pulling a trailer-load of tea leaves, to pass.
“This is the second-flush or sprouting period,
isn’t it, Mr Barua?” Rajvir asked. “It lasts from May
to July and yields the best tea.”
“You seem to have done your homework before
coming,” Pranjol’s father said in surprise.
“Yes, Mr Barua,” Rajvir admitted. “But I hope to
learn much more while I’m here.”
First Flight
I. 1. Look at these words: upkeep, downpour, undergo, dropout, walk-in. They
are built up from a verb (keep, pour, go, drop, walk) and an adverb or a
particle (up, down, under, out, in).
96
Use these words appropriately in the sentences below. You may consult
a dictionary.
(i) A heavy
Bay of Bengal.
has been forecast due to low pressure in the
(ii) Rakesh will
major surgery tomorrow morning.
of our family property.
(iii) My brother is responsible for the
(iv) The
rate for this accountancy course is very high.
(v) She went to the Enterprise Company to attend a
interview.
2. Now fill in the blanks in the sentences given below by combining the
verb given in brackets with one of the words from the box as appropriate.
over
by
through
out
up
down
(i) The Army attempted unsuccessfully to
(throw)the Government.
(ii) Scientists are on the brink of a major
(break)in cancer research.
(iii) The State Government plans to build a
to speed up traffic on the main highway. (pass)
for Bhubaneswar
(iv) Gautama’s
on life changed when he realised that the world
is full of sorrow. (look)
(v) Rakesh seemed unusually
2019-20
after the game. (cast)II. Notice how these -ing and -ed adjectives are used.
(a) Chess is an interesting game.I am very interested in chess.
(b) Going trekking in the Himalayas
this summer is an exciting idea.We are very excited about the
trek.
(c) Are all your school books this
boring?He was bored as he had no
friends there.
The -ing adjectives show the qualities that chess, trekking, or these books
have: they cause interest, excitement, or boredom in you. The —ed/—en
adjectives show your mental state, or your physical state: how you feel in
response to ideas, events or things.
1. Think of suitable -ing or -ed adjectives to answer the following
questions. You may also use words from those given above.
How would you describe
(i) a good detective serial on television?
(ii) a debate on your favourite topic ‘Homework Should Be Banned’?
(iii) how you feel when you stay indoors due to incessant rain?
(iv) how you feel when you open a present?
(v) how you feel when you watch your favourite programme on
97
television?
(vi) the look on your mother’s face as you waited in a queue?
(vii) how you feel when tracking a tiger in a tiger reserve forest?
2. Now use the adjectives in the exercise above, as appropriate, to write
a paragraph about Coorg.
1. Read the following passage about tea.
India and tea are so intertwined together that life without the brew is
unimaginable. Tea entered our life only in the mid-nineteenth century
when the British started plantations in Assam and Darjeeling! In the
beginning though, Indians shunned the drink as they thought it was a
poison that led to umpteen diseases. Ironically, tea colonised Britain
where it became a part of their social diary and also led to the
establishment of numerous tea houses.
2019-20
Glimpses of India
(viii) the story you have recently read, or a film you have seen?Today, scientific research across the world has attempted to establish
the beneficial qualities of tea — a fact the Japanese and the Chinese
knew anyway from ancient times, attributing to it numerous medicinal
properties.
[Source: ‘History: Tea Anytime’ by Ranjit Biswas from
Literary Review, The Hindu, 1 October 2006]
First Flight
Collect information about tea, e.g. its evolution as a drink, its beneficial
qualities. You can consult an encyclopedia or visit Internet websites. Then
form groups of five and play the following roles: Imagine a meeting of a tea
planter, a sales agent, a tea lover (consumer), a physician and a tea-shop
owner. Each person in the group has to put forward his/her views about
tea. You may use the following words and phrases.
• I feel ...• It is important to know ...
• I disagree with you ...• I think that tea ...
• I would like you to know ...• I agree with ...
• It is my feeling ...• I suggest ...
• May I know why you ...• I am afraid ...
2. You are the sales executive of a famous tea company and you have been asked
to draft an advertisement for the product. Draft the advertisement using the
information you collected for the role play. You can draw pictures or add
photographs and make your advertisement colourful.
98
WHAT WE HAVE DONE
Given a picture of three different regions of India, giving an idea of how varied and
charming and beautiful our country is.
WHAT YOU CAN D O
Get your students to arrange an exhibition of photographs of different places in India
— good sources are travel articles in Sunday newspapers, or in travel magazines, or in
brochures available at travel agents. Ask students to bring in two or three pictures
each, accompanied by a short, neatly hand-written write-up on the place shown in the
pictures. Arrange them on your classroom walls. Let the students study them. They can
then discuss, and later vote on the place they would most like to see.
2019-20The Trees
Can there be a forest without trees? Where are the trees in this
poem, and where do they go?
The trees inside are moving out into the forest,
the forest that was empty all these days
where no bird could sit
no insect hide
no sun bury its feet in shadow
the forest that was empty all these nights
will be full of trees by morning.
All night the roots work
to disengage themselves from the cracks
in the veranda floor.
The leaves strain toward the glass
small twigs stiff with exertion
long-cramped boughs shuffling under the roof
like newly discharged patients
half-dazed, moving
to the clinic doors.
I sit inside, doors open to the veranda
writing long letters
in which I scarcely mention the departure
of the forest from the house.
The night is fresh, the whole moon shines
in a sky still open
the smell of leaves and lichen
still reaches like a voice into the rooms.
2019-20My head is full of whispers
which tomorrow will be silent.
Listen. The glass is breaking.
The trees are stumbling forward
into the night. Winds rush to meet them.
The moon is broken like a mirror,
its pieces flash now in the crown
of the tallest oak.
ADRIENNE RICH
First Flight
Adrienne Rich was born in Baltimore, Maryland, U.S.A. in 1929. She is
the author of nearly twenty volumes of poetry, and has been called a
feminist and a radical poet.
to disengage themselves: to separate themselves
strain: make efforts to move
bough: branch
shuffling: moving repeatedly from one position to another
100
lichen: crusty patches or bushy growth on tree trunks/bare ground formed by
association of fungus and alga.
1.
(i) Find, in the first stanza, three things that cannot happen in a treeless
forest.
(ii) What picture do these words create in your mind: “… sun bury its feet
in shadow…”? What could the poet mean by the sun’s ‘feet’?
2.
(i) Where are the trees in the poem? What do their roots, their leaves, and
their twigs do?
(ii) What does the poet compare their branches to?
3.
(i) How does the poet describe the moon: (a) at the beginning of the third
stanza, and (b) at its end? What causes this change?
(ii) What happens to the house when the trees move out of it?
(iii) Why do you think the poet does not mention “the departure of the forest
from the house” in her letters? (Could it be that we are often silent
about important happenings that are so unexpected that they embarrass
us? Think about this again when you answer the next set of questions.)
2019-204. Now that you have read the poem in detail, we can begin to ask what the
poem might mean. Here are two suggestions. Can you think of others?
(i) Does the poem present a conflict between man and nature? Compare it
with A Tiger in the Zoo. Is the poet suggesting that plants and trees,
used for ‘interior decoration’ in cities while forests are cut down, are
‘imprisoned’, and need to ‘break out’?
(ii) On the other hand, Adrienne Rich has been known to use trees as a
metaphor for human beings; this is a recurrent image in her poetry.
What new meanings emerge from the poem if you take its trees to be
symbolic of this particular meaning?
5. You may read the poem ‘On Killing a Tree’ by Gieve Patel (Beehive – Textbook
in English for Class IX, NCERT). Compare and contrast it with the poem you
have just read.
Homophones
Can you find the words below that are spelt
similarly, and sometimes even pronounced
similarly, but have very different meanings? Check
their pronunciation and meaning in a dictionary.
101
• The dump was so full that it had to refuse more
refuse.
• The insurance was invalid for the invalid.
2019-20
The Trees
• When shot at, the dove dove into the bushes.BEFORE YOU READ
Gavin Maxwell lives in a cottage in Camusfearna, in the West
Highlands in Scotland. When his dog Jonnie died, Maxwell was too
sad to think of keeping a dog again. But life without a pet was
lonely... Read what happened then, in Maxwell’s own words.
Activity
1. Do you have a pet? If you do, you perhaps know that a pet is a
serious responsibility. Read in the box below what the SPCA —
the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals — has to
say about how to care for a pet.
Owning a pet is a lifetime of commitment (up to ten years or
more if you own a dog or a cat) involving considerable
responsibility. The decision to acquire one, therefore, should
be made by the whole family. Without full agreement by
everyone, the pet could end up unwanted. Puppies and
kittens are so adorable, it is easy to understand why adults
and children alike would be attracted to them. Unfortunately
their cute looks are often a disadvantage, because people
purchase them without consideration and the knowledge on
how to take proper care of them. The basic points you should
keep in mind before adopting a puppy are:
• an annual dog licence in accordance with government
regulations
• its annual vaccination against major diseases
• toilet training
• regular grooming and bathing
• obedience training
• don’t forget you should feed your pet a balanced diet
• socialisation (many dogs are kept confined in cages or tied
up to stop them from dirtying the garden or from chewing
on shoes — this is wrong) is very important
• a daily dose of exercise, affection and play.
2019-20Reading up on the subject beforehand is another
important requirement and will guide you towards being a
responsible pet owner. Selected pet shops and major book
stores provide books on the care of various breeds/pets.
2. Imagine someone has gifted you a pet. With your partner’s help,
make a list of the things you need to know about the pet in
order to take good care of it. One has been done for you.
(i) The food it eats.
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
3. Otters are found in large numbers in the marshes (i.e. wet
areas near lakes, rivers or seas) near Basra, a town in Iraq.
Imagine you wanted to bring an otter from Iraq to London,
as a pet. What special arrangements would you need to
make for your pet otter? You would need to find a place
with lots of water, for example. What other points should
you think about? The information about Iraq and London
given below may help you.
London
Iraq has mostly broad plains
and marshes along the
Iranian border in the south,
with large flooded areas. A
large part of Iraq’s land area
is desert, so it has cool
winters and dry, hot and
cloudless summers. The
mountain areas near Iran
and Turkey have cold winters.
There is heavy snowfall there,
and when the snow melts in
spring, it causes floods in
central and southern Iraq.London
has
a
large
population and is a very busy
city. In addition to multi-
storeyed buildings, however,
it has many open spaces or
parks. It has a temperate
climate (i.e. it is neither very
hot, nor very cold), with
regular but generally light
rainfall or snow throughout
the year. The warmest month
is July, and the coolest
month is January. February
is the driest month. Snow is
not very common in London.
2019-20
Mijbil the Otter
Iraq
103First Flight
I
104
EARLY in the New Year of 1956 I travelled to Southern
Iraq. By then it had crossed my mind that I should
like to keep an otter instead of a dog, and that
Camusfearna, ringed by water a stone’s throw from
its door, would be an eminently suitable spot for
this experiment.
When I casually mentioned this to a friend, he
as casually replied that I had better get one in the
Tigris marshes, for there they were as common as
mosquitoes, and were often tamed by the Arabs.
We were going to Basra to the Consulate-General
to collect and answer our mail from Europe. At the
Consulate-General we found that my friend’s mail
had arrived but that mine had not.
I cabled to England, and when, three days later,
nothing had happened, I tried to telephone. The call
had to be booked twenty-four hours in advance. On
the first day the line was out of order; on the second
the exchange was closed for a religious holiday. On
the third day there was another breakdown. My
friend left, and I arranged to meet him in a week’s
time. Five days later, my mail arrived.
I carried it to my bedroom to read, and there,
squatting on the floor, were two Arabs; beside them
lay a sack that squirmed from time to time. They
handed me a note from my friend: “Here is your otter...”
crossed my mind
(a thought) came
into my mind
a stone's throw
a very short distance
cabled
sent a message by
telegraph
squirmed
twisted about
II
With the opening of that sack began a phase of my
life that has not yet ended, and may, for all I know,
not end before I do. It is, in effect, a thraldom to
otters, an otter fixation, that I have since found to
be shared by most other people, who have ever
owned one.
The creature that emerged from this sack on to
the spacious tiled floor of the Consulate bedroom
resembled most of all a very small, medievally-
conceived, dragon. From the head to the tip of the
2019-20
thraldom (old
fashioned)
being under the
control of
fixation
a very strong
attachment or feeling
medievally-
conceived
an imagination of
the Middle Ages2019-20
christened
named
hostile
unfriendly
aloof and
indifferent
keeping a distance
apathy
absence of interest
105
so to speak
as it were (one could
say this)
provoking
causing anger or
some other reaction
Mijbil the Otter
tail he was coated with symmetrical pointed scales
of mud armour, between whose tips was visible a
soft velvet fur like that of a chocolate-brown mole.
He shook himself, and I half expected a cloud of
dust, but in fact it was not for another month that I
managed to remove the last of the mud and see the
otter, as it were, in his true colours.
Mijbil, as I called the otter, was, in fact, of a
race previously unknown to science, and was at
length christened by zoologists Lutrogale perspicillata
maxwelli, or Maxwell’s otter. For the first twenty-
four hours Mijbil was neither hostile nor friendly;
he was simply aloof and indifferent, choosing to
sleep on the floor as far from my bed as possible.
The second night Mijbil came on to my bed in the
small hours and remained asleep in the crook of
my knees until the servant brought tea in the
morning, and during the day he began to lose his
apathy and take a keen, much too keen, interest in
his surroundings. I made a body-belt for him and
took him on a lead to the bathroom, where for half
an hour he went wild with joy in the water, plunging
and rolling in it, shooting up and down the length
of the bathtub underwater, and making enough slosh
and splash for a hippo. This, I was to learn, is a
characteristic of otters; every drop of water must
be, so to speak, extended and spread about the
place; a bowl must at once be overturned, or, if it
will not be overturned, be sat in and sploshed in
until it overflows. Water must be kept on the move
and made to do things; when static it is wasted
and provoking.First Flight
106
Two days later, Mijbil escaped from my bedroom
as I entered it, and I turned to see his tail
disappearing round the bend of the corridor that
led to the bathroom. By the time I got there he was
up on the end of the bathtub and fumbling at the
chromium taps with his paws. I watched, amazed;
in less than a minute he had turned the tap far
enough to produce a trickle of water, and after a
moment or two achieved the full flow. (He had been
lucky to turn the tap the right way; on later
occasions he would sometimes screw it up still
tighter, chittering with irritation and disappointment
at the tap’s failure to cooperate.)
Very soon Mij would follow me without a lead
and come to me when I called his name. He spent
most of his time in play. He spent hours shuffling a
rubber ball round the room like a four-footed soccer
player using all four feet to dribble the ball, and he
could also throw it, with a powerful flick of the
neck, to a surprising height and distance. But the
real play of an otter is when he lies on his back
and juggles with small objects between his paws.
Marbles were Mij’s favourite toys for this pastime:
he would lie on his back rolling two or more of them
up and down his wide, flat belly without ever
dropping one to the floor.
fumbling
trying to do
something in a
clumsy manner
flick
a quick, light
movement
Oral Comprehension Check
1. What ‘experiment’ did Maxwell think Camusfearna would be
suitable for?
2. Why does he go to Basra? How long does he wait there, and why?
3. How does he get the otter? Does he like it? Pick out the words that tell
you this.
4. Why was the otter named ‘Maxwell’s otter’?
5. Tick the right answer. In the beginning, the otter was
• aloof and indifferent
• friendly
• hostile
6. What happened when Maxwell took Mijbil to the bathroom? What did
it do two days after that?
2019-20III
2019-20
dreaded the
prospect
was in great fear of
something that
would happen in the
future
an appalling
spectacle
a shocking scene
whipped off
quickly took off
107
ricochetting bullet
a bullet which
changes direction
after hitting a surface
infuriated
very angry
took her into my
confidence
here, shared with
her my experiences
or secrets
Mijbil the Otter
The days passed peacefully at Basra, but I dreaded
the prospect of transporting Mij to England, and to
Camusfearna. The British airline to London would
not fly animals, so I booked a flight to Paris on
another airline, and from there to London. The
airline insisted that Mij should be packed into a
box not more than eighteen inches square, to be
carried on the floor at my feet. I had a box made,
and an hour before we started, I put Mij into the
box so that he would become accustomed to it, and
left for a hurried meal.
When I returned, there was an appalling
spectacle. There was complete silence from the box,
but from its airholes and chinks around the lid,
blood had trickled and dried. I whipped off the lock
and tore open the lid, and Mij, exhausted and blood-
spattered, whimpered and caught at my leg. He had
torn the lining of the box to shreds; when I removed
the last of it so that there were no cutting edges
left, it was just ten minutes until the time of the
flight, and the airport was five miles distant. I put
the miserable Mij back into the box, holding down
the lid with my hand.
I sat in the back of the car with the box beside
me as the driver tore through the streets of Basra
like a ricochetting bullet. The aircraft was waiting
to take off; I was rushed through to it by infuriated
officials. Luckily, the seat booked for me was at
the extreme front. I covered the floor around my
feet with newspapers, rang for the air hostess,
and gave her a parcel of fish (for Mij) to keep in a
cool place. I took her into my confidence about the
events of the last half hour. I have retained the
most profound admiration for that air hostess; she
was the very queen of her kind. She suggested
that I might prefer to have my pet on my knee, and
I could have kissed her hand in the depth of my
gratitude. But, not knowing otters, I was quite
unprepared for what followed.First Flight
108
Mij was out of the box in a flash. He disappeared
at high speed down the aircraft. There were squawks
and shrieks, and a woman stood up on her seat
screaming out, “A rat! A rat!” I caught sight of Mij’s
tail disappearing beneath the legs of a portly white-
turbaned Indian. Diving for it, I missed, but found
my face covered in curry. “Perhaps,” said the air
hostess with the most charming smile, “it would be
better if you resumed your seat, and I will find the
animal and bring it to you.”
I returned to my seat. I was craning my neck
trying to follow the hunt when suddenly I heard
from my feet a distressed chitter of recognition and
welcome, and Mij bounded on to my knee and began
to nuzzle my face and my neck.
Oral Comprehension Check
1. How was Mij to be transported to England?
2. What did Mij do to the box?
2019-20
portly
stout
bounded on to
climbed up quickly
nuzzle
to rub gently with
the nose3. Why did Maxwell put the otter back in the box? How do you think he
felt when he did this?
4. Why does Maxwell say the airhostess was “the very queen of her kind”?
5. What happened when the box was opened?
IV
After an eventful journey, Maxwell and his otter reach London, where
he has a flat.
2019-20
terrapin shell
the shell of small
turtle found in North
America
engrossed
completely
interested in
109
ambush
to attack suddenly
from a hidden
position
compulsive habits
habits impossible to
control
upright
(here) post or rod
placed straight up
distraction
something that
takes away one’s
attention from what
one is doing
Mijbil the Otter
Mij and I remained in London for nearly a month.
He would play for hours with a selection of toys,
ping-pong balls, marbles, rubber fruit, and a
terrapin shell that I had brought back from his native
marshes. With the ping-pong ball he invented a
game of his own which could keep him engrossed
for up to half an hour at a time. A suitcase that I
had taken to Iraq had become damaged on the
journey home, so that the lid, when closed,
remained at a slope from one end to the other. Mij
discovered that if he placed the ball on the high
end it would run down the length of the suitcase.
He would dash around to the other end to ambush
its arrival, hide from it, crouching, to spring up
and take it by surprise, grab it and trot off with it
to the high end once more.
Outside the house I exercised him on a lead,
precisely as if he had been a dog. Mij quickly developed
certain compulsive habits on these walks in the
London streets, like the rituals of children who on
their way to and from school must place their feet
squarely on the centre of each paving block; must
touch every seventh upright of the iron railings, or
pass to the outside of every second lamp post. Opposite
to my flat was a single-storied primary school, along
whose frontage ran a low wall some two feet high. On
his way home, but never on his way out, Mij would
tug me to this wall, jump on to it, and gallop the full
length of its thirty yards, to the hopeless distraction
both of pupils and of staff within.First Flight
110
It is not, I suppose, in any way strange that the
average Londoner should not recognise an otter, but
the variety of guesses as to what kind of animal this
might be came as a surprise to me. Otters belong to
a comparatively small group of animals called
Mustellines, shared by the badger, mongoose, weasel,
stoat, mink and others. I faced a continuous barrage
of conjectural questions that sprayed all the
Mustellines but the otter; more random guesses hit
on ‘a baby seal’ and ‘a squirrel.’ ‘Is that a walrus,
mister?’ reduced me to giggles, and outside a dog
show I heard ‘a hippo’. A beaver, a bear cub, a leopard
— one, apparently, that had changed its spots —
and a ‘brontosaur’; Mij was anything but an otter.
But the question for which I awarded the highest
score came from a labourer digging a hole in the street.
I was still far from him when he laid down his tool,
put his hands on his hips, and began to stare. As I
drew nearer I saw his expression of surprise and
affront, as though he would have me know that he
was not one upon whom to play jokes. I came abreast
of him; he spat, glared, and then growled out, “Here,
Mister — what is that supposed to be?”
barrage of
conjectural
questions
a stream of
questions filled with
guesses
Oral Comprehension Check
1. What game had Mij invented?
2. What are ‘compulsive habits’? What does Maxwell say are the
compulsive habits of
(i) school children
(ii) Mij?
3. What group of animals do otters belong to?
4. What guesses did the Londoners make about what Mij was?
1. What things does Mij do which tell you that he is an intelligent, friendly and
fun-loving animal who needs love?
2. What are some of the things we come to know about otters from this text?
3. Why is Mij’s species now known to the world as Maxwell’s otter?
2019-204. Maxwell in the story speaks for the otter, Mij. He tells us what the otter feels
and thinks on different occasions. Given below are some things the otter
does. Complete the column on the right to say what Maxwell says about
what Mij feels and thinks.
What Mij does
How Mij feels or thinks
plunges, rolls in the water and
makes the water splosh and splash
Screws the tap in the wrong way
Nuzzles Maxwell’s face and neck in
the aeroplane
5. Read the story and find the sentences where Maxwell describes his pet
otter. Then choose and arrange your sentences to illustrate those statements
below that you think are true.
Maxwell’s description
(i) makes Mij seem almost human, like a small boy.
(ii) shows that he is often irritated with what Mij does.
(iii) shows that he is often surprised by what Mij does.
111
(iv) of Mij’s antics is comical.
(v) shows that he observes the antics of Mij very carefully.
(vi) shows that he thinks Mij is a very ordinary otter.
(vii) shows that he thinks the otter is very unusual.
To talk about something that happened regularly in the past, but does not
happen any longer, we use would or used to. Both would and used to can
describe repeated actions in the past.
(a) Mij would follow me without a lead and come to me when I called his
name.
(b) He would play for hours with a selection of toys.
(c) On his way home… Mij would tug me to this wall.
(d) When I was five years old, I used to follow my brother all over the
place.
(e) He used to tease me when Mother was not around.
To describe repeated states or situations in the past, however, we use only
used to. (We cannot use would for states or situations in the past.) So we do
2019-20
Mijbil the Otter
I. Describing a Repeated Action in the Pastnot use would with verbs like be, have, believe, etc. Look at the following
sentences.
(a) When we were young, we used to believe there were ghosts in school.
(Note: believe shows a state of mind.)
(b) Thirty years ago, more women used to be housewives than now.
(Note: be here describes a situation.)
From the table below, make as many correct sentences as you can using
would and/or used to, as appropriate. (Hint: First decide whether the
words in italics show an action, or a state or situation, in the past.)
Then add two or three sentences of your own to it.
Emperor Akbar
be fond of musical evenings.
Every evening we
would
Fifty years ago, very few people
First Flight
Till the 1980s, Shanghai
112
take long walks on the beach.
own cars.
used to
My uncle
have very dirty streets.
spend his holidays by the sea.
II. Noun Modifiers
To describe or give more information about a noun (or to modify a noun), we
use adjectives or adjectival phrases. Look at these examples from the text:
(a) An eminently suitable spot
(c) Symmetrical pointed scales
(b) His wide, flat belly
(d) A ricocheting bullet
Nouns can also be used as modifiers:
(a) The dinner party
(b) A designer dress
(c) The car keys
We can use more than one noun as modifier. Proper nouns can also be used:
(a) The Christmas dinner party
(b) A silk designer dress
(c) The Maruti car keys
In the examples below, there is an adjectival phrase in front of a noun modifier:
(a) The lovely Christmas party
(b) A trendy silk designer dress
(c) The frightfully expensive golden Maruti car keys
1. Look at these examples from the text, and say whether the modifiers
(in italics) are nouns, proper nouns, or adjective plus noun.
(i) An otter fixation(iv) The London streets
(ii) The iron railings(v) soft velvet fur
(iii) The Tigris marshes(vi) A four-footed soccer player
2019-202. Given below are some nouns, and a set of modifiers (in the box). Combine
the nouns and modifiers to make as many appropriate phrases as you
can. (Hint: The nouns and modifiers are all from the texts in this book.)
templegirlstriangledresses
personthoughtsboysroar
giftsscreamfarewellexpression
timesubjectlandscapehandkerchief
crossingflightchatterboxprofession
physiquecoffeeviewcelebration
collegeroughhundredstoneordinary
loveuncomfortablewhiteslangslack
barerailroadtermendousfamilymarriage
plumpinvigoratingpanoramicheartbreakingbirthday
incorrigibleridiculousloudfirstthree
III. Read this sentence:
He shook himself, and I half expected a cloud of dust.
The author uses a cloud of dust to give a picture of a large quantity of dust.
Phrases like this indicate a particular quantity of something that is not
usually countable. For example: a bit of land, a drop of blood, a pinch of salt,
a piece of paper.
113
1. Match the words on the left with a word on the right. Some words on
the left can go with more than one word on the right.
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
blood
cotton
stones
gold
fried fish
snow
water
wind
2. Use a bit of/a piece of/a bunch of/a cloud of/a lump of with the
italicised nouns in the following sentences. The first has been done
for you as an example.
(i) My teacher gave me some
advice.
My teacher gave me a bit of advice.
(ii) Can you give me some clay,
please.
2019-20
Mijbil the Otter
(i) a portion of
(ii) a pool of
(iii) flakes of
(iv) a huge heap of
(v) a gust of
(vi) little drops of
(vii) a piece of
(viii) a pot of(iii) The information you gave was
very useful.
(iv) Because of these factories,
smoke hangs over the city.
(v) Two stones rubbed together
can produce sparks of fire.
(vi) He gave me some flowers on
my birthday.
First Flight
You have seen how Maxwell describes Mij the otter’s feelings and thoughts by
watching him. Play the game of dumb charades. Take turns to express a feeling
or thought silently, through gestures. Let the class speak out their guesses
about the feelings or thoughts you are trying to express.
Write a description of a person or an animal (such as a pet) that you know very
well and love very much. Questions (4) and (5) in ‘Thinking about the Text’ will
have given you some idea about how to do this. Mention some things the person
or animal does, what you think the person or animal feels, etc.
114
WHAT WE HAVE DONE
Narrated a story about an interesting and unusual pet.
WHAT YOU CAN DO
1.
2.
3.
The events narrated in this text took place over half-a-century ago. Discuss with
your class what changes have taken place over these years in
(i) what animals we can keep as pets (some species are protected under the laws
for wildlife preservation)
(ii) the laws for exporting and importing or trading in animals
(iii) rules for transporting goods, pets, etc. on aircraft.
The class might wish to do their own research on these questions and report their
findings in class.
Ask students if they know of other examples of unusual pets or of wild animals which
are trained to work for or amuse humans (eg dancing bears, lions and tigers in a
circus, elephants trained to work or take part in ceremonies). Then lead students into
a discussion about the ethics of keeping wild animals as pets: What are the difficulties
these may entail? According to the students, what will the animal miss most when it
is taken away from its natural habitat? Do they think that it is ‘cute’ to see Mij the
otter on a leash? Get them to look at the situation from all points of view.
Visit the website wwf.org.uk/core/wildlife to know more about otters and
otter conservation projects.
2019-20Fog
The fog comes
on little cat feet.
It sits looking
over harbour and city
on silent haunches
and then moves on.
CARL SANDBURG
on haunches: sitting with knees bent
1.
(i) What does Sandburg think the fog is like?
(ii) How does the fog come?
(iii) What does ‘it’ in the third line refer to?
(iv) Does the poet actually say that the fog is like a cat? Find three things
that tell us that the fog is like a cat.
2. You know that a metaphor compares two things by transferring a feature of
one thing to the other (See Unit 1).
(i) Find metaphors for the following words and complete the table below.
Also try to say how they are alike. The first is done for you.
Storm
tiger
pounces over the fields, growls
Train
Fire
School
Home
(ii) Think about a storm. Try to visualise the force of the storm, hear the sound
of the storm, feel the power of the storm and the sudden calm that happens
afterwards. Write a poem about the storm comparing it with an animal.
3. Does this poem have a rhyme scheme? Poetry that does not have an obvious
rhythm or rhyme is called ‘free verse’.
2019-20BEFORE YOU READ
In this sensitive story, an eight-year old girl’s first bus journey into
the world outside her village is also her induction into the mystery
of life and death. She sees the gap between our knowing that there
is death, and our understanding of it.
Activity
1. Look at the words and phrases given below. Then put a tick
against the ones you think you will find in the text.
___ a set of passengers___ get on the bus
___ get off the bus___ platform
___ Tickets, please___ a roar and a rattle
___ a row of seats___ slowing down to a crawl
___ blowing a whistle
2. You must have travelled by bus more than once. What can
you see from a fast-moving bus? Given below are some
suggestions. Speak briefly about some of these scenes, or
about other such scenes that you have seen; or write a
sentence or two about them.
riversgreen fieldshills
roadside shopsmarket placesrailway tracks
moving trainsvehicles on the roadtrees
a crowdclothes in shopsanimals
2019-20I
THERE was a girl named Valliammai who was called
Valli for short. She was eight years old and very
curious about things. Her favourite pastime was
standing in the front doorway of her house,
watching what was happening in the street outside.
There were no playmates of her own age on her
street, and this was about all she had to do.
But for Valli, standing at the front door was every
bit as enjoyable as any of the elaborate games other
children played. Watching the street gave her many
new unusual experiences.
117
Madam Rides the Bus
2019-20First Flight
118
The most fascinating thing of all was the bus
that travelled between her village and the nearest
town. It passed through her street each hour, once
going to the town and once coming back. The sight
of the bus, filled each time with a new set of
passengers, was a source of unending joy for Valli.
Day after day she watched the bus, and
gradually a tiny wish crept into her head and
grew there: she wanted to ride on that bus, even
if just once. This wish became stronger and
stronger, until it was an overwhelming desire.
Valli would stare wistfully at the people who got
on or off the bus when it stopped at the street
corner. Their faces would kindle in her longings,
dreams, and hopes. If one of her friends happened
to ride the bus and tried to describe the sights of
the town to her, Valli would be too jealous to listen
and would shout, in English: “Proud! proud!”
Neither she nor her friends really understood the
meaning of the word, but they used it often as a
slang expression of disapproval.
Over many days and months Valli listened
carefully to conversations between her neighbours
and people who regularly used the bus, and she also
asked a few discreet questions here and there. This
way she picked up various small details about the
bus journey. The town was six miles from her village.
The fare was thirty paise one way — “which is almost
nothing at all,” she heard one well-dressed man say,
but to Valli, who scarcely saw that much money
from one month to the next, it seemed a fortune. The
trip to the town took forty-five minutes. On reaching
town, if she stayed in her seat and paid another
thirty paise, she could return home on the same
bus. This meant that she could take the one-o’clock
afternoon bus, reach the town at one forty-five, and
be back home by about two forty-five...
On and on went her thoughts as she calculated
and recalculated, planned and replanned.
2019-20
wistfully
longingly
kindle
set alight (a fire),
here, feelings
a slang expression
informal words,
often used within a
close group
discreet questions
careful questionsOral Comprehension Check
1. What was Valli’s favourite pastime?
2. What was a source of unending joy for Valli? What was her strongest
desire?
3. What did Valli find out about the bus journey? How did she find out
these details?
4. What do you think Valli was planning to do?
II
2019-20
119
Madam Rides the Bus
Well, one fine spring day the afternoon bus was
just on the point of leaving the village and turning
into the main highway when a small voice was heard
shouting: “Stop the bus! Stop the bus!” And a tiny
hand was raised commandingly.
The bus slowed down to a crawl, and the
conductor, sticking his head out the door, said,
“Hurry then! Tell whoever it is to come quickly.”
“It’s me,” shouted Valli. “I’m the one who has to
get on.”
By now the bus had come to a stop, and the
conductor said, “Oh, really! You don’t say so!”
“Yes, I simply have to go to town,” said Valli,
still standing outside the bus, “and here’s my
money.” She showed him some coins.
“Okay, okay, but first you must get on the bus,”
said the conductor, and he stretched out a hand to
help her up.
“Never mind,” she said, “I can get on by myself.
You don’t have to help me.”
The conductor was a jolly sort, fond of joking. “Oh,
please don’t be angry with me, my fine madam,” he
said. “Here, have a seat right up there in front.
Everybody move aside please — make way for madam.”
It was the slack time of day, and there were slack time
only six or seven passengers on the bus. They were a time when there is
all looking at Valli and laughing with the conductor. not much work
Valli was over come with shyness. Avoiding
everyone’s eyes, she walked quickly to an empty
seat and sat down.First Flight
120
“May we start now, madam?” the conductor
asked, smiling. Then he blew his whistle twice, and
the bus moved forward with a roar.
It was a new bus, its outside painted a gleaming
white with some green stripes along the sides.
Inside, the overhead bars shone like silver. Directly
in front of Valli, above the windshield, there was a
beautiful clock. The seats were soft and luxurious.
Valli devoured everything with her eyes. But
when she started to look outside, she found her
view cut off by a canvas blind that covered the lower
part of her window. So she stood up on the seat
and peered over the blind.
The bus was now going along the bank of a canal.
The road was very narrow. On one side there was
the canal and, beyond it, palm trees, grassland,
distant mountains, and the blue, blue sky. On the
other side was a deep ditch and then acres and
acres of green fields — green, green, green, as far
as the eye could see.
Oh, it was all so wonderful!
Suddenly she was startled by a voice. “Listen,
child,” said the voice, “you shouldn’t stand like that.
Sit down.”
2019-202019-20
haughtily
proudly
mimicking
copying
121
Madam Rides the Bus
Sitting down, she looked to see who had spoken.
It was an elderly man who had honestly been
concer ned for her, but she was annoyed by
his attention.
“There’s nobody here who’s a child,” she said
haughtily. “I’ve paid my thirty paise like everyone
else.”
The conductor chimed in. “Oh, sir, but this is a
very grown-up madam. Do you think a mere girl
could pay her own fare and travel to the city
all alone?”
Valli shot an angry glance at the conductor and
said, “I am not a madam. Please remember that.
And you’ve not yet given me my ticket.”
“I’ll remember,” the conductor said, mimicking
her tone. Everyone laughed, and gradually Valli too
joined in the laughter.
The conductor punched a ticket and handed it
to her. “Just sit back and make yourself comfortable.
Why should you stand when you’ve paid for a seat?”
“Because I want to,” she answered, standing
up again.
“But if you stand on the seat, you may fall and
hurt yourself when the bus makes a sharp turn
or hits a bump. That’s why we want you to sit
down, child.”
“I’m not a child, I tell you,” she said irritably.
“I’m eight years old.”
“Of course, of course. How stupid of me! Eight
years — my!”
The bus stopped, some new passengers got on,
and the conductor got busy for a time. Afraid of
losing her seat, Valli finally sat down.
An elderly woman came and sat beside her. “Are
you all alone, dear?” she asked Valli as the bus
started again.
Valli found the woman absolutely repulsive —
such big holes she had in her ear lobes, and such
ugly earrings in them! And she could smell the betel
nut the woman was chewing and see the betel juice
that was threatening to spill over her lips at any
repulsive
causing strong
dislikeFirst Flight
moment. Ugh! — who could be sociable with such
a person?
“Yes, I’m travelling alone,” she answered curtly.
“And I’ve got a ticket too.”
“Yes, she’s on her way to town,” said the
conductor. “With a thirty-paise ticket.”
“Oh, why don’t you mind your own business,”
said Valli. But she laughed all the same, and the
conductor laughed too.
But the old woman went on with her drivel. “Is
it proper for such a young person to travel alone?
Do you know exactly where you’re going in town?
What’s the street? What’s the house number?”
“You needn’t bother about me. I can take care of
myself,” Valli said, turning her face towards the
window and staring out.
curtly
showing displeasure
drivel
silly nonsense
Oral Comprehension Check
1.
2.
3.
4.
Why does the conductor call Valli ‘madam’?
Why does Valli stand up on the seat? What does she see now?
What does Valli tell the elderly man when he calls her a child?
Why didn’t Valli want to make friends with the elderly woman?
122
III
Her first journey — what careful, painstaking,
elaborate plans she had had to make for it! She had
thriftily saved whatever stray coins came her way,
resisting every temptation to buy peppermints, toys,
balloons, and the like, and finally she had saved a
total of sixty paise. How difficult it had been,
particularly that day at the village fair, but she had
resolutely stifled a strong desire to ride the merry-
go-round, even though she had the money.
After she had enough money saved, her next
problem was how to slip out of the house without
her mother’s knowledge. But she managed this
without too much difficulty. Every day after lunch
her mother would nap from about one to four or so.
Valli always used these hours for her ‘excursions’
as she stood looking from the doorway of her house
2019-20
thriftily
spend money
carefully
resolutely stifled
suppressed/
controlled with
determinationor sometimes even ventured out into the village; ventured out
today, these same hours could be used for her first went cautiously,
courageously
excursion outside the village.
The bus rolled on now cutting across a bare
landscape, now rushing through a tiny hamlet or
past an odd wayside shop. Sometimes the bus
seemed on the point of gobbling up another vehicle
that was coming towards them or a pedestrian
crossing the road. But lo! somehow it passed on
smoothly, leaving all obstacles safely behind. Trees
came running towards them but then stopped as
the bus reached them and simply stood there
helpless for a moment by the side of the road before
rushing away in the other direction.
Suddenly Valli clapped her hands with glee. A
young cow, tail high in the air, was running very
fast, right in the middle of the road, right in front
of the bus. The bus slowed to a crawl, and the driver
sounded his horn loudly again and again. But the
more he honked, the more frightened the animal
became and the faster it galloped — always right in
front of the bus.
123
Madam Rides the Bus
2019-20First Flight
124
Somehow this was very funny to Valli. She laughed
and laughed until there were tears in her eyes.
“Hey, lady, haven’t you laughed enough?” called,
the conductor. “Better save some for tomorrow.”
At last the cow moved off the road. And soon the
bus came to a railroad crossing. A speck of a train
could be seen in the distance, growing bigger and
bigger as it drew near. Then it rushed past the
crossing gate with a tremendous roar and rattle,
shaking the bus. Then the bus went on and passed
the train station. From there it traversed a busy,
well-laid-out shopping street and, turning, entered
a wider thoroughfare. Such big, bright-looking
shops! What glittering displays of clothes and other
merchandise! Such big crowds!
Struck dumb with wonder, Valli gaped at everything.
Then the bus stopped and everyone got off
except Valli.
“Hey, lady,” said the conductor, “aren’t you ready
to get off? This is as far as your thirty paise
takes you.”
“No,” Valli said, “I’m going back on this same
bus.” She took another thirty paise from her pocket
and handed the coins to the conductor.
“Why, is something the matter?”
“No, nothing’s the matter. I just felt like having
a bus ride, that’s all.”
“Don’t you want to have a look at the sights,
now that you’re here?”
“All by myself? Oh, I’d be much too afraid.”
Greatly amused by the girl’s way of speaking,
the conductor said, “But you weren’t afraid to come
in the bus.”
“Nothing to be afraid of about that,” she
answered.
“Well, then, why not go to that stall over there
and have something to drink? Nothing to be afraid
of about that either."
“Oh, no, I couldn’t do that.”
“Well, then, let me bring you a cold drink.”
2019-20
thoroughfare
a busy public road
merchandise
things for sale“No, I don’t have enough money. Just give me
my ticket, that’s all.”
“It’ll be my treat and not cost you anything.”
“No, no,” she said firmly, “please, no.”
The conductor shrugged, and they waited until
it was time for the bus to begin the return journey.
Again there weren’t many passengers.
Oral Comprehension Check
1.
2.
3.
4.
How did Valli save up money for her first journey? Was it easy for her?
What did Valli see on her way that made her laugh?
Why didn’t she get off the bus at the bus station?
Why didn’t Valli want to go to the stall and have a drink? What does
this tell you about her?
IV
2019-20
125
spreadeagled
spread out
haunted
returned repeatedly
to her mind; was
impossible to forget
Madam Rides the Bus
“Won’t your mother be looking for you?” the
conductor asked when he gave the girl her ticket.
“No, no one will be looking for me,” she said.
The bus started, and again there were the same
wonderful sights.
Valli wasn’t bored in the slightest and greeted
everything with the same excitement she’d felt the
first time. But suddenly she saw a young cow lying
dead by the roadside, just where it had been struck
by some fast-moving vehicle.
“Isn’t that the same cow that ran in front of the
bus on our trip to town?” she asked the conductor.
The conductor nodded, and she was overcome
with sadness. What had been a lovable, beautiful
creature just a little while ago had now suddenly
lost its charm and its life and looked so horrible, so
frightening as it lay there, legs spreadeagled, a fixed
stare in its lifeless eyes, blood all over...
The bus moved on. The memory of the dead cow
haunted her, dampening her enthusiasm. She no
longer wanted to look out the window.
She sat thus, glued to her seat, until the bus
reached her village at three forty. She stood up andFirst Flight
126
stretched herself. Then she turned to the conductor
and said, “Well, sir, 1 hope to see you again.”
“Okay, madam,” he answered her, smiling.
“Whenever you feel like a bus ride, come and join
us. And don’t forget to bring your fare.”
She laughed and jumped down from the bus.
Then away she went, running straight for home.
When she entered her house she found her
mother awake and talking to one of Valli’s aunts,
the one from South Street. This aunt was a real
chatterbox, never closing her mouth once she
started talking.
“And where have you been?” said her aunt when
Valli came in. She spoke very casually, not expecting
a reply. So Valli just smiled, and her mother and
aunt went on with their conversation.
“Yes, you’re right,” her mother said. “So many
things in our midst and in the world outside. How
can we possibly know about everything? And even
when we do know about something, we often can’t
understand it completely, can we?”
“Oh, yes!” breathed Valli.
“What?” asked her mother. “What’s that you say?”
“Oh,” said Valli, “I was just agreeing with what
you said about things happening without our
knowledge.”
“Just a chit of a girl, she is,” said her aunt, “and
yet look how she pokes her nose into our conversation,
just as though she were a grown lady.”
Valli smiled to herself. She didn’t want them to
understand her smile. But, then, there wasn’t much
chance of that, was there?
[Translated from the Tamil
by K. S. Sundaram
Illustrated by R. K. Laxman]
2019-20
pokes her nose
takes an interest in
something that
doesn't concern her1. What was Valli’s deepest desire? Find the words and phrases in the story
that tell you this.
2. How did Valli plan her bus ride? What did she find out about the bus, and
how did she save up the fare?
3. What kind of a person is Valli? To answer this question, pick out the following
sentences from the text and fill in the blanks. The words you fill in are the
clues to your answer.
(i) “Stop the bus! Stop the bus!” And a tiny hand was raised
(ii) “Yes, I
.
go to town,” said Valli, still standing outside the
bus.
(iii) “There’s nobody here
,” she said haughtily. “I’ve paid my
thirty paise like everyone else.”
(iv) “Never mind,” she said, “I can
. You don’t have to help me.
”I’m not a child, I tell you,” she said,
(v) “You needn’t bother about me. I
.
,” Valli said, turning her
face toward the window and staring out.
(vi) Then she tur ned to the conductor and said, “Well, sir, I hope
127
.”
4. Why does the conductor refer to Valli as ‘madam’?
5. Find the lines in the text which tell you that Valli was enjoying her ride on
the bus.
8. The author describes the things that Valli sees from an eight-year -old’s
point of view. Can you find evidence from the text for this statement?
This story has a lot of people talking in it. The conductor jokes and laughs with
Valli, some passengers try to show their concern for her, and her mother and
her aunt spend time chatting.
Read the conversations carefully. Then think of similar people, or similar
situations that you have experienced. Mimic a person or persons who spoke to
you, saying what they said, along with your replies.
2019-20
Madam Rides the Bus
6. Why does Valli refuse to look out of the window on her way back?
7. What does Valli mean when she says, “I was just agreeing with what you
said about things happening without our knowledge.”Write a page — about three paragraphs — on one of the following topics.
1. Have you ever planned something entirely on your own, without taking grown-
ups into your confidence? What did you plan, and how? Did you carry out
your plan?
2. Have you made a journey that was unforgettable in some way? What made it
memorable?
3. Are you concerned about traffic and road safety? What are your concerns?
How would you make road travel safer and more enjoyable?
WHAT WE HAVE DONE
Related the story of Valli’s first bus ride.
WHAT YOU CAN D O
The students should be given two or three days to collect old (used) tickets from
their friends, relatives and acquaintances: they could be bus tickets, train tickets,
plane tickets, cinema tickets, tickets to cultural events, etc. By the time they finish
the lesson they should be able to get a good collection in place. Get them to make
a collage using as many as possible of the tickets collected, on a sheet of poster
paper. This can then form the basis for many interesting activities: classification
according to type of tickets (for what?) or price (how much?), etc; the most desirable
tickets, the tickets no one wants, etc. — let students think of more ways to classify
them. Get students to write a paragraph with the collage as base, and their
imagination as guide.
2.You can also ask the students do the following.
First Flight
1.
128
(i) In the story Valli has to save money and make plans to be able to ride the
bus. In pairs, discuss how you spent your pocket money last month. Did you
spend it on yourself, or on someone dear to you?
(ii) Valli's enthusiasm is dampened and the memory of the dead cow haunts her.
In groups, discuss an incident which may have troubled or discouraged you.
2019-20The Tale of Custard
the Dragon
This poem is written in the style of a ballad — a song
or poem that tells a story. You must be familiar with ballads that
narrate tales of courage or heroism. This poem is a humorous
ballad close to a parody.
Read it aloud, paying attention to the rhythm.
Belinda lived in a little white house,
With a little black kitten and a little grey mouse,
And a little yellow dog and a little red wagon,
And a realio, trulio, little pet dragon.
Now the name of the little black kitten was Ink,
And the little grey mouse, she called him Blink,
And the little yellow dog was sharp as Mustard,
But the dragon was a coward, and she called him Custard.
Custard the dragon had big sharp teeth,
And spikes on top of him and scales underneath,
Mouth like a fireplace, chimney for a nose,
And realio, trulio daggers on his toes.
Belinda was as brave as a barrel full of bears,
And Ink and Blink chased lions down the stairs,
Mustard was as brave as a tiger in a rage,
But Custard cried for a nice safe cage.
2019-20Belinda tickled him, she tickled him unmerciful,
Ink, Blink and Mustard, they rudely called him Percival,
They all sat laughing in the little red wagon
At the realio, trulio, cowardly dragon.
Belinda giggled till she shook the house,
And Blink said Weeck! which is giggling for a mouse,
Ink and Mustard rudely asked his age,
When Custard cried for a nice safe cage.
First Flight
Suddenly, suddenly they heard a nasty sound,
And Mustard growled, and they all looked around.
Meowch! cried Ink, and ooh! cried Belinda,
For there was a pirate, climbing in the winda.
130
Pistol in his left hand, pistol in his right,
And he held in his teeth a cutlass bright,
His beard was black, one leg was wood;
It was clear that the pirate meant no good.
Belinda paled, and she cried Help! Help!
But Mustard fled with a terrified yelp,
Ink trickled down to the bottom of the household,
And little mouse Blink strategically mouseholed.
But up jumped Custard, snorting like an engine,
Clashed his tail like irons in a dungeon,
With a clatter and a clank and a jangling squirm,
He went at the pirate like a robin at a worm.
The pirate gaped at Belinda’s dragon,
And gulped some grog from his pocket flagon,
He fired two bullets, but they didn’t hit,
And Custard gobbled him, every bit.
2019-20Belinda embraced him, Mustard licked him,
No one mourned for his pirate victim.
Ink and Blink in glee did gyrate
Around the dragon that ate the pirate.
But presently up spoke little dog Mustard,
I’d have been twice as brave if I hadn’t been flustered.
And up spoke Ink and up spoke Blink,
We’d have been three times as brave, we think,
And Custard said, I quite agree
That everybody is braver than me.
Belinda still lives in her little white house,
With her little black kitten and her little grey mouse,
And her little yellow dog and her little red wagon,
And her realio, trulio little pet dragon.
131
Belinda is as brave as a barrel full of bears,
And Ink and Blink chase lions down the stairs,
Mustard is as brave as a tiger in a rage,
But Custard keeps crying for a nice safe cage.
Ogden Nash wrote over four hundred pieces of comic verse. The
best of his work was published in 14 volumes between 1931 and
1972. His work is perhaps best described in this poetic tribute by
Anthony Burgess:
...he brought a new kind of sound to our literary diversions.
And didn’t care much about breaking the poetic laws of the Medes
and the Persians.
He uses lines, sometimes of considerable length that are colloquial
and prosy.
And at the end presents you with a rhyme...
This bringing together of the informal and the formal is what his
genius chiefly loves.
I am trying to imitate him here, but he is probably quite inimitable.
2019-20
The Tale of Custard the Dragon
OGDEN NASHgrog: a drink typically drunk by sailors
gyrate: to move around in circles
1. Who are the characters in this poem? List them with their pet names.
2. Why did Custard cry for a nice safe cage? Why is the dragon called “cowardly
dragon”?
3. “Belinda tickled him, she tickled him unmerciful...” Why?
4. The poet has employed many poetic devices in the poem. For example:
“Clashed his tail like iron in a dungeon” — the poetic device here is a
simile. Can you, with your partner, list some more such poetic devices
used in the poem?
5. Read stanza three again to know how the poet describes the appearance of
the dragon.
First Flight
6. Can you find out the rhyme scheme of two or three stanzas of the poem?
132
7. Writers use words to give us a picture or image without actually saying what
they mean. Can you trace some images used in the poem?
8. Do you find The Tale of Custard the Dragon to be a serious or a light-hearted
poem? Give reasons to support your answer.
9. This poem, in ballad form, tells a story. Have you come across any such
modern song or lyric that tells a story? If you know one, tell it to the class.
Collect such songs as a project.
Have fun writing your ballad. Gather information (choose/decide an idea/theme),
organise your materials under characters and story and then write. Revise and edit
your ballad to make it entertaining. Use the following guidelines to write your ballad.
• Purpose of writing the ballad: to entertain and interest
• To whom I am writing: decide for whom you are writing
• How should I structure features?:
– Tell a simple narrative
– A few major characters
– A strong rhythm and rhyme
– May have a refrain (single or two line(s) repeated often)
– Divide into verses
2019-20BEFORE YOU READ
Activity
Use a dictionary or ask for your teacher’s help as you discuss the
following questions in groups.
1. What is a sermon? Is it different from a lecture or a talk? Can
this word also be used in a negative way or as a joke (as in
“my mother’s sermon about getting my work done on time…”)?
2. Find out the meanings of the words and phrases given in
the box.
afflicted with be composed desolation,
lamentation procure be subject to
3. Have you heard of the Sermon on the Mount? Who delivered it?
Who do you think delivered a sermon at Benares?
GAUTAMA Buddha (563 B.C. – 483 B.C.) began life as a
prince named Siddhartha Gautama, in northern
India. At twelve, he was sent away for schooling in
the Hindu sacred scriptures and four years later he
returned home to marry a princess. They had a son
and lived for ten years as befitted royalty. At about
the age of twenty-five, the Prince, heretofore shielded
from the sufferings of the world, while out hunting
chanced upon a sick man, then an aged man, then
a funeral procession, and finally a monk begging
for alms. These sights so moved him that he at
once went out into the world to seek enlightenment
concerning the sorrows he had witnessed.
He wandered for seven years and finally sat
down under a peepal tree, where he vowed to stay
2019-20
chanced upon
came across by
chance
enlightenment
a state of high
spiritual knowledgeFirst Flight
until enlightenment came. Enlightened after seven
days, he renamed the tree the Bodhi Tree (Tree of
Wisdom) and began to teach and to share his new
understandings. At that point he became known as
the Buddha (the Awakened or the Enlightened). The
Buddha preached his first sermon at the city of
Benares, most holy of the dipping places on the River
Ganges; that sermon has been preserved and is given
here. It reflects the Buddha’s wisdom about one
inscrutable kind of suffering.
134
Kisa Gotami had an only son, and he died. In her grief
she carried the dead child to all her neighbours, asking
them for medicine, and the people said, “She has lost
her senses. The boy is dead.”
At length, Kisa Gotami met a man who replied to her
request, “I cannot give thee medicine for thy child, but I
know a physician who can.”
And the girl said, “Pray tell me, sir; who is it?” And
the man replied, "Go to Sakyamuni, the Buddha.”
Kisa Gotami repaired to the Buddha and cried, “Lord
and Master, give me the medicine that will cure my boy.”
The Buddha answered, “I want a handful of mustard-
seed.” And when the girl in her joy promised to procure
it, the Buddha added, “The mustard-seed must be taken
from a house where no one has lost a child, husband,
parent or friend.”
Poor Kisa Gotami now went from house to house,
and the people pitied her and said, “Here is mustard-
seed; take it!” But when she asked, “Did a son or
daughter, a father or mother, die in your family?” they
answered her, “Alas! the living are few, but the dead are
many. Do not remind us of our deepest grief.” And there
was no house but some beloved one had died in it.
Kisa Gotami became weary and hopeless, and sat
down at the wayside watching the lights of the city, as
they flickered up and were extinguished again. At last
the darkness of the night reigned everywhere. And she
considered the fate of men, that their lives flicker up
and are extinguished again. And she thought to herself,
“How selfish am I in my grief! Death is common to all;
yet in this valley of desolation there is a path that leads
him to immortality who has surrendered all selfishness.”
The Buddha said, ‘‘The life of mortals in this world
is troubled and brief and combined with pain. For there
2019-20
sermon
religious or moral
talk
dipping places
bathing
inscrutable
something which
cannot be
understood
repaired (a stylistic
use) went to
valley of
desolation
an area which is filled
with deep sorrow
mortals
those bound to dieis not any means by which those that have been born
can avoid dying; after reaching old age there is death; of
such a nature are living beings. As ripe fruits are early
in danger of falling, so mortals when born are always in
danger of death. As all earthen vessels made by the
potter end in being broken, so is the life of mortals. Both
young and adult, both those who are fools and those
who are wise, all fall into the power of death; all are
subject to death.
“Of those who, overcome by death, depart from life,
a father cannot save his son, nor kinsmen their relations.
Mark! while relatives are looking on and lamenting
deeply, one by one mortals are carried off, like an ox
that is led to the slaughter. So the world is afflicted with
death and decay, therefore the wise do not grieve,
knowing the terms of the world.
“Not from weeping nor from grieving will anyone
obtain peace of mind; on the contrary, his pain will be
the greater and his body will suffer. He will make himself
sick and pale, yet the dead are not saved by his
lamentation. He who seeks peace should draw out the
arrow of lamentation, and complaint, and grief. He who
has drawn out the arrow and has become composed
will obtain peace of mind; he who has overcome all
sorrow will become free from sorrow, and be blessed.”
afflicted with
affected by suffering,
disease or pain
lamentation
expression of sorrow
135
[Source: Betty Renshaw
Values and Voices: A College Reader (1975)]
2. Kisa Gotami again goes from house to house after she speaks with the
Buddha. What does she ask for, the second time around? Does she get it?
Why not?
3. What does Kisa Gotami understand the second time that she failed to
understand the first time? Was this what the Buddha wanted her to
understand?
4. Why do you think Kisa Gotami understood this only the second time? In
what way did the Buddha change her understanding?
5. How do you usually understand the idea of ‘selfishness’? Do you agree with
Kisa Gotami that she was being ‘selfish in her grief ’?
2019-20
The Sermon at Benares
1. When her son dies, Kisa Gotami goes from house to house. What does she
ask for? Does she get it? Why not?I. This text is written in an old-fashioned style, for it reports an incident
more than two millennia old. Look for the following words and phrases
in the text, and try to rephrase them in more current language, based
on how you understand them.
• give thee medicine for thy child
• Pray tell me
• Kisa repaired to the Buddha
• there was no house but someone had died in it
• kinsmen
• Mark!
First Flight
II. You know that we can combine sentences using words like and, or, but, yet
and then. But sometimes no such word seems appropriate. In such a case
we can use a semicolon (;) or a dash ( —) to combine two clauses.
136
She has no interest in music; I doubt she will become a singer like
her mother.
The second clause here gives the speaker’s opinion on the first clause.
Here is a sentence from the text that uses semicolons to combine
clauses. Break up the sentence into three simple sentences. Can you
then say which has a better rhythm when you read it, the single sentence
using semicolons, or the three simple sentences?
For there is not any means by which those who have been born can avoid
dying; after reaching old age there is death; of such a nature are living beings.
The Buddha’s sermon is over 2500 years old. Given below are two recent texts
on the topic of grief. Read the texts, comparing them with each other and with
the Buddha’s sermon. Do you think the Buddha’s ideas and way of teaching
continue to hold meaning for us? Or have we found better ways to deal with
grief? Discuss this in groups or in class.
I. A Guide to Coping with the Death
of a Loved One
Martha is having difficulty sleeping lately and no longer enjoys doing things
with her friends. Martha lost her husband of 26 years to cancer a month ago.
Anya, age 17, doesn’t feel like eating and spends the days in her room
crying. Her grandmother recently died.
Both of these individuals are experiencing grief. Grief is an emotion
natural to all types of loss or significant change.
2019-20Feelings of Grief
Although grief is unique and personal, a broad range of feelings and
behaviours are commonly experienced after the death of a loved one.
• Sadness. This is the most common, and it is not necessarily manifested
by crying.
• Anger. This is one of the most confusing feelings for a survivor. There
may be frustration at not being able to prevent the death, and a sense
of not being able to exist without the loved one.
• Guilt and Self-reproach. People may believe that they were not kind
enough or caring enough to the person who died, or that the person
should have seen the doctor sooner.
• Anxiety. An individual may fear that she/he won’t be able to care for
herself/himself.
• Loneliness. There are reminders throughout the day that a partner,
family member or friend is gone. For example, meals are no longer
prepared the same way, phone calls to share a special moment don’t
happen.
• Fatigue. There is an overall sense of feeling tired.
• Disbelief: This occurs particularly if it was a sudden death.
Helping Others Who Are Experiencing Grief
When a friend, loved one, or co-worker is experiencing grief—how can we
help? It helps to understand that grief is expressed through a variety of
behaviours.
Reach out to others in their grief, but understand that some may not
want to accept help and will not share their grief. Others will want to
talk about their thoughts and feelings or reminisce.
Be patient and let the grieving person know that you care and are
there to support him or her.
Soon after my wife died — her car slid off an icy road in 1985 — a school
psychologist warned me that my children and I were not mourning in the
right way. We felt angry; the proper first stage, he said, is denial.
In late August this year, my 38-year-old son, Michael, died suddenly in his
sleep, leaving behind a 2-year-old son and a wife expecting their next child.
There is no set form for grief, and no ‘right’ way to express it. There
seems to be an expectation that, after a great loss, we will progress
systematically through the well-known stages of grief. It is wrong, we are
told, to jump to anger — or to wallow too long in this stage before moving
towards acceptance.
2019-20
The Sermon at Benares
II. Good Grief
AMITAI ETZIONI
137First Flight
But I was, and am, angry. To make parents bury their children is wrong;
to have both my wife and son taken from me, for forever and a day, is cruel
beyond words.
A relative from Jerusalem, who is a psychiatrist, brought some solace by
citing the maxim: ‘We are not to ask why, but what.’ The ‘what’ is that which
survivors in grief are bound to do for one another. Following that advice, my
family, close friends and I keep busy, calling each other and giving long
answers to simple questions like, “How did your day go today?” We try to
avoid thinking about either the immediate past or the bereft future. We take
turns playing with Max, Michael’s two-year-old son. Friends spend nights
with the young widow, and will be among those holding her hand when the
baby is born.
Focusing on what we do for one another is the only consolation we
can find.
Write a page (about three paragraphs) on one of the following topics. You can
think about the ideas in the text that are relevant to these topics, and add your
own ideas and experiences to them.
1. Teaching someone to understand a new or difficult idea
2. Helping each other to get over difficult times
3. Thinking about oneself as unique, or as one among billions of others
138
WHAT WE HAVE DONE
Narrated the story of the Buddha, and the advice he gave to the grief-stricken woman.
WHAT YOU CAN D O
1.
Read and discuss the following extract from Kahlil Gibran’s The Prophet with the
students.
Joy and Sorrow
Then a woman said, “Speak to us of Joy and Sorrow.”
And he answered:
Your joy is your sorrow unmasked.
And the selfsame well from which your laughter rises was oftentimes filled
with your tears.
And how else can it be?
The deeper that sorrow carves into your being, the more joy you can contain.
Is not the cup that holds your wine the very cup that was burned in the
potter’s oven?
2019-20And is not the lute that soothes your spirit, the very wood that was hollowed
out with knives?
When you are joyous, look deep into your heart and you shall find it is only
that which has given you sorrow that is giving you joy.
When you are sorrowful look again in your heart, and you shall see that in
truth you are weeping for that which has been your delight.
Some of you say, “Joy is greater than sorrow,” and others say, “Nay, sorrow
is the greater.”
But I say unto you, they are inseparable.
Together they come, and when one sits alone with you at your board,
remember that the other is asleep upon your bed.
2.
Help students to read and memorise the following extract from Tagore.
Say not in grief that she is no more
but say in thankfulness that she was.
A death is not the extinguishing of a light,
but the putting out of the
lamp because the dawn has come.
139
The Sermon at Benares
2019-20For Anne Gregory
This poem is a conversation between a young man and a young
woman. What are they arguing about?
“Never shall a young man,
Thrown into despair
By those great honey-coloured
Ramparts at your ear,
Love you for yourself alone
And not your yellow hair.”
“But I can get a hair-dye
And set such colour there,
Brown, or black, or carrot,
That young men in despair
May love me for myself alone
And not my yellow hair.”
“I heard an old religious man
But yesternight declare
That he had found a text to prove
That only God, my dear,
Could love you for yourself alone
And not your yellow hair.”
WILLIAM BUTLER YEATS
William Butler Yeats (1865 –1939) was an Irish nationalist. He was
educated in London and Dublin, and was interested in folklore and
mythology. He won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1923.
2019-20ramparts: the high, wide walls around a castle or fort, for example, the ramparts
of the Red Fort
1. What does the young man mean by “great honey-coloured /Ramparts at
your ear?” Why does he say that young men are “thrown into despair” by
them?
2. What colour is the young woman’s hair? What does she say she can change
it to? Why would she want to do so?
3. Objects have qualities which make them desirable to others. Can you think
of some objects (a car, a phone, a dress…) and say what qualities make one
object more desirable than another? Imagine you were trying to sell an object:
what qualities would you emphasise?
4. What about people? Do we love others because we like their qualities, whether
physical or mental? Or is it possible to love someone “for themselves alone”?
Are some people ‘more lovable’ than others? Discuss this question in pairs
or in groups, considering points like the following.
(i) a parent or caregiver’s love for a newborn baby, for a mentally or
physically challenged child, for a clever child or a prodigy
(ii) the public’s love for a film star, a sportsperson, a politician, or a social
worker
(iii) your love for a friend, or brother or sister
(iv) your love for a pet, and the pet’s love for you.
2019-20
For Anne Gregory
5. You have perhaps concluded that people are not objects to be valued for
their qualities or riches rather than for themselves. But elsewhere Yeats
asks the question: How can we separate the dancer from the dance? Is it
possible to separate ‘the person himself or herself’ from how the person
looks, sounds, walks, and so on? Think of how you or a friend or member of
your family has changed over the years. Has your relationship also changed?
In what way?
141BEFORE YOU READ
Activity
1. The word ‘proposal’ has several meanings. Can you guess what
sort of proposal the play is about?
(i) a suggestion, plan or scheme for doing something
(ii) an offer for a possible plan or action
(iii) the act of asking someone’s hand in marriage
A Russian Wedding
Do you know anything about a Russian marriage ceremony?
Read this article about a Russian wedding.
Preparations for a Russian Wedding: A Russian wedding
is very simple. The planning only includes arranging for
rings, brides’ dress, cars, and a reception. Earlier, the bride’s
family paid for the reception, but now-a-days brides’ and
grooms’ families usually share expenses. A Russian wedding
lasts for two days; some weddings last as long as a week,
and the occasion becomes something to remember for years.
The necessary part of the wedding ceremony is a wedding
procession of several cars. The best friends of the groom/
bride meet before the wedding a few times, make posters,
write speeches and organise contests. When the groom
arrives to fetch the bride for the registration, he has to fight
to get her! Russians usually live in apartments in tall
buildings, and the groom has to climb several stairs to reach
his bride. But at each landing he must answer a question
to be allowed to go up. The bride’s friends ask difficult
questions (sometimes about the bride, sometimes just
difficult riddles), and the groom must answer with the help
of his friends. For example, he may be shown a few photos
of baby girls and he must say which one his bride is. If he
guesses wrong, he must pay cash to move ahead. After the
2019-20marriage registration, the newly-married couple leaves the
guests for a tour of the city sights. After two or three hours
of the city tour the couple arrives at the reception. The couple
sits at a specially arranged table with their family, friends
and invited guests. The reception starts with toasts to the
couple. A wedding toast is a custom where a close friend or
relative of the groom or the bride says a few words to wish
the couple, then everyone raises their glass of wine, and
drink it up at the same moment. The groom is then asked to
kiss the bride. After a few toasts, people start eating and
drinking, and generally have fun. After some time, the bride
gets ‘stolen’! She disappears, and when the groom starts
looking for her, he is asked to pay a fee. Usually it is his
friends who ‘steal’ the bride. Then there are the bride’s
friends — they steal the bride’s shoe. The groom must pay
money for the shoe too. The guests enjoy watching these
tussles, and continue partying.
2. Do you think Indian and Russian weddings have any customs
in common? With the help of a partner, fill in the table below.
Wedding Ceremonies in Russia and India
Customs similar to
Indian ones
Customs different from
Indian ones
2019-20
The Proposal
‘The Proposal’ (originally titled ‘A Marriage Proposal’) is a one-act
play, a farce, by the Russian short story writer and dramatist Anton
Chekhov. It was written in 1888–89.
The play is about the tendency of wealthy families to seek ties
with other wealthy families, to increase their estates by encouraging
marriages that make good economic sense. Ivan Lomov, a long time
wealthy neighbour of Stepan Chubukov, also wealthy, comes to
seek the hand of Chubukov’s twenty-five-year-old daughter, Natalya.
All three are quarrelsome people, and they quarrel over petty issues.
The proposal is in danger of being forgotten amidst all this
quarrelling. But economic good sense ensures that the proposal is
made, after all — although the quarrelling perhaps continues!
143Characters
First Flight
STEPAN STEPANOVITCH CHUBUKOV : a landowner
NATALYA STEPANOVNA
: his daughter, twenty-five years old
IVAN VASSILEVITCH LOMOV
: a neighbour of Chubukov, a large and
hearty, but very suspicious, landowner
144
A drawing-room in Chubukov‘s house.
Lomov enters, wearing a dress-jacket and white gloves. Chubukov rises
to meet him.
CHUBUKOV : My dear fellow, whom do I see! Ivan Vassilevitch! I am
extremely glad! [Squeezes his hand] Now this is a
surprise, my darling... How are you?
LOMOV
: Thank you. And how may you be getting on?
CHUBUKOV : We just get along somehow, my angel, thanks to your
prayers, and so on. Sit down, please do... Now, you know,
you shouldn’t forget all about your neighbours, my darling.
My dear fellow, why are you so formal in your get-up!
Evening dress, gloves, and so on. Can you be going
anywhere, my treasure?
LOMOV
: No. I’ve come only to see you, honoured Stepan
Stepanovitch.
CHUBUKOV : Then why are you in evening dress, my precious? As if
you’re paying a New Year’s Eve visit!
LOMOV
: Well, you see, it’s like this. [Takes his arm] I’ve come to you,
honoured Stepan Stepanovitch, to trouble you with a request.
Not once or twice have I already had the privilege of applying
to you for help, and you have always, so to speak... I must
ask your pardon, I am getting excited. I shall drink some
water, honoured Stepan Stepanovitch.
[Drinks.]
CHUBUKOV : [aside] He’s come to borrow money. Shan’t give him any!
[aloud] What is it, my beauty?
LOMOV
: You see, Honoured Stepanitch... I beg pardon Stepan
Honouritch... I mean, I’m awfully excited, as you will
please notice... In short, you alone can help me, though I
don’t deserve it, of course... and haven’t any right to
count on your assistance...
CHUBUKOV : Oh, don’t go round and round it, darling! Spit it out! Well?
LOMOV
: One moment... this very minute. The fact is I’ve come to
ask the hand of your daughter, Natalya Stepanovna,
in marriage.
2019-202019-20
145
The Proposal
CHUBUKOV : [joyfully] By Jove! Ivan Vassilevitch! Say it again — I
didn’t hear it all!
LOMOV
: I have the honour to ask...
CHUBUKOV : [interrupting] My dear fellow... I’m so glad, and so on...
Yes, indeed, and all that sort of thing. [Embraces and kisses
Lomov] I’ve been hoping for it for a long time. It’s been my
continual desire. [Sheds a tear] And I’ve always loved you,
my angel, as if you were my own son. May God give you
both — His help and His love and so on, and so much
hope... What am I behaving in this idiotic way for? I’m off
my balance with joy, absolutely off my balance! Oh, with
all my soul... I’ll go and call Natasha, and all that.
LOMOV
: [greatly moved] Honoured Stepan Stepanovitch, do you
think I may count on her consent?
CHUBUKOV : Why, of course, my darling, and... as if she won’t consent!
She’s in love; egad, she’s like a lovesick cat, and so on.
Shan’t be long!
[Exit.]
LOMOV
: It’s cold... I’m trembling all over, just as if I’d got an
examination before me. The great thing is, I must have
my mind made up. If I give myself time to think, to
hesitate, to talk a lot, to look for an ideal, or for real
love, then I’ll never get married. Brr... It’s cold! NatalyaFirst Flight
NATLYA:
LOMOV
NATALYA:
:
LOMOV
NATALYA:
:
LOMOV:
NATALYA
LOMOV:
:
146
Stepanovna is an excellent housekeeper, not bad-looking,
well-educated. What more do I want? But I’m getting a
noise in my ears from excitement. [Drinks] And it’s
impossible for me not to marry. In the first place, I’m
already 35 — a critical age, so to speak. In the second
place, I ought to lead a quiet and regular life. I suffer
from palpitations, I’m excitable and always getting
awfully upset; at this very moment my lips are trembling,
and there’s a twitch in my right eyebrow. But the very
worst of all is the way I sleep. I no sooner get into bed
and begin to go off, when suddenly something in my left
side gives a pull, and I can feel it in my shoulder and
head... I jump up like a lunatic, walk about a bit and lie
down again, but as soon as I begin to get off to sleep
there’s another pull! And this may happen twenty times...
[Natalya Stepanovna comes in.]
Well, there! It’s you, and papa said, “Go; there’s a
merchant come for his goods.” How do you do, Ivan
Vassilevitch?
How do you do, honoured Natalya Stepanovna?
You must excuse my apron and neglige. We’re shelling
peas for drying. Why haven’t you been here for such a
long time? Sit down... [They seat themselves.] Won’t you
have some lunch?
No, thank you, I’ve had some already.
Then smoke. Here are the matches. The weather is
splendid now, but yesterday it was so wet that the workmen
didn’t do anything all day. How much hay have you
stacked? Just think, I felt greedy and had a whole field
cut, and now I’m not at all pleased about it because I’m
afraid my hay may rot. I ought to have waited a bit. But
what’s this? Why, you’re in evening dress! Well, I never!
Are you going to a ball or what? Though I must say you
look better... Tell me, why are you got up like that?
[excited] You see, honoured Natalya Stepanovna... the
fact is, I’ve made up my mind to ask you to hear me out...
Of course you’ll be surprised and perhaps even angry,
but a... [aside] It’s awfully cold!
What’s the matter? [pause] Well?
I shall try to be brief. You must know, honoured Natalya
Stepanovna, that I have long, since my childhood, in fact,
2019-20:
LOMOV
NATALYA:
:
LOMOV
NATALYA:
:
LOMOV:
NATALYA
LOMOV:
:
NATALYA:
LOMOV
NATALYA
LOMOV:
:
:
NATALYA:
2019-20
147
The Proposal
NATALYA
had the privilege of knowing your family. My late aunt
and her husband, from whom, as you know, I inherited
my land, always had the greatest respect for your father
and your late mother. The Lomovs and the Chubukovs
have always had the most friendly, and I might almost
say the most affectionate, regard for each other. And, as
you know, my land is a near neighbour of yours. You will
remember that my Oxen Meadows touch your birchwoods.
Excuse my interrupting you. You say, “my Oxen Meadows”.
But are they yours?
Yes, mine.
What are you talking about? Oxen Meadows are ours,
not yours!
No, mine, honoured Natalya Stepanovna.
Well, I never knew that before. How do you make that
out?
How? I’m speaking of those Oxen Meadows which are
wedged in between your birchwoods and the Burnt
Marsh.
Yes, yes... they’re ours.
No, you’re mistaken, honoured Natalya Stepanovna,
they’re mine.
Just think, Ivan Vassilevitch! How long have they been
yours?
How long? As long as I can remember.
Really, you won’t get me to believe that!
But you can see from the documents, honoured Natalya
Stepanovna. Oxen Meadows, it’s true, were once the
subject of dispute, but now everybody knows that they
are mine. There’s nothing to argue about. You see my
aunt’s grandmother gave the free use of these Meadows
in perpetuity to the peasants of your father’s grandfather,
in return for which they were to make bricks for her. The
peasants belonging to your father’s grandfather had the
free use of the Meadows for forty years, and had got into
the habit of regarding them as their own, when it
happened that...
No, it isn’t at all like that! Both grandfather and great-
grandfather reckoned that their land extended to Burnt
Marsh — which means that Oxen Meadows were ours. I
don’t see what there is to argue about. It’s simply silly!LOMOV
NATALYA
LOMOV
First Flight
NATALYA
LOMOV
NATALYA
148LOMOV
NATALYA
LOMOV
NATALYA
LOMOV
: I’ll show you the documents, Natalya Stepanovna!
: No, you’re simply joking, or making fun of me. What a
surprise! We’ve had the land for nearly three hundred
years, and then we’re suddenly told that it isn’t ours!
Ivan Vassilevitch, I can hardly believe my own ears. These
Meadows aren’t worth much to me. They only come to
five dessiatins, and are worth perhaps 300 roubles, but I
can’t stand unfairness. Say what you will, I can’t stand
unfairness.
: Hear me out, I implore you! The peasants of your father’s
grandfather, as I have already had the honour of
explaining to you, used to bake bricks for my aunt’s
grandmother. Now my aunt’s grandmother, wishing to
make them a pleasant...
: I can’t make head or tail of all this about aunts and
grandfathers and grandmothers. The Meadows are ours,
that’s all.
: Mine.
: Ours! You can go on proving it for two days on end, you
can go and put on fifteen dress jackets, but I tell you
they’re ours, ours, ours! I don’t want anything of yours
and I don’t want to give anything of mine. So there!
: Natalya Stepanovna, I don’t want the Meadows, but I am
acting on principle. If you like, I’ll make you a present
of them.
: I can make you a present of them myself, because they’re
mine! Your behaviour, Ivan Vassilevitch, is strange, to
say the least! Up to this we have always thought of you
as a good neighbour, a friend; last year we lent you our
threshing-machine, although on that account we had to
put off our own threshing till November, but you behave
to us as if we were gypsies. Giving me my own land,
indeed! No, really, that’s not at all neighbourly! In my
opinion, it’s even impudent, if you want to know.
: Then you make out that I’m a landgrabber? Madam, never
in my life have I grabbed anybody else’s land and I shan’t
allow anybody to accuse me of having done so. [Quickly
steps to the carafe and drinks more water] Oxen Meadows
are mine!
: It’s not true, they’re ours!
: Mine!
2019-20NATALYA
2019-20
149
The Proposal
: It’s not true! I’ll prove it! I’ll send my mowers out to the
Meadows this very day!
LOMOV
: What?
: My mowers will be there this very day!
NATALYA
LOMOV
: I’ll give it to them in the neck!
NATALYA
: You dare!
LOMOV
: [Clutches at his heart] Oxen Meadows are mine! You
understand? Mine!
NATALYA
: Please don’t shout! You can shout yourself hoarse in your
own house but here I must ask you to restrain yourself!
LOMOV
: If it wasn’t, madam, for this awful, excruciating
palpitation, if my whole inside wasn’t upset, I’d talk to
you in a different way! [Yells] Oxen Meadows are mine!
NATALYA
: Ours!
LOMOV
: Mine!
NATALYA
: Ours!
LOMOV
: Mine!
[Enter Chubukov]
CHUBUKOV : What’s the matter? What are you shouting for?
NATALYA
: Papa, please tell this gentleman who owns Oxen
Meadows, we or he?
CHUBUKOV : [to Lomov] Darling, the Meadows are ours!First Flight
LOMOV
150
: But, please, Stepan Stepanovitch, how can they be yours?
Do be a reasonable man! My aunt’s grandmother gave
the Meadows for the temporary and free use of your
grandfather’s peasants. The peasants used the land for
forty years and got accustomed to it as if it was their
own, when it happened that...
CHUBUKOV : Excuse me, my precious. You forget just this, that the
peasants didn’t pay your grandmother and all that,
because the Meadows were in dispute, and so on. And
now everybody knows that they’re ours. It means that
you haven’t seen the plan.
LOMOV
: I’ll prove to you that they’re mine!
CHUBUKOV : You won’t prove it, my darling —
LOMOV
: I shall
CHUBUKOV : Dear one, why yell like that? You won’t prove anything
just by yelling. I don’t want anything of yours, and don’t
intend to give up what I have. Why should I? And you
know, my beloved, that if you propose to go on arguing
about it, I’d much sooner give up the Meadows to the
peasants than to you. There!
LOMOV
: I don’t understand! How have you the right to give away
somebody else’s property?
CHUBUKOV : You may take it that I know whether I have the right or
not. Because, young man, I’m not used to being spoken
to in that tone of voice, and so on. I, young man, am
twice your age, and ask you to speak to me without
agitating yourself, and all that.
LOMOV
: No, you just think I’m a fool and want to have me on! You
call my land yours, and then you want me to talk to you
calmly and politely! Good neighbours don’t behave like
that, Stepan Stepanovitch! You’re not a neighbour, you’re
a grabber!
CHUBUKOV : What’s that? What did you say?
NATALYA
: Papa, send the mowers out to the Meadows at once!
CHUBUKOV : What did you say, sir?
NATALYA
: Oxen Meadows are ours, and I shan’t give them up, shan’t
give them up, shan’t give them up!
LOMOV
: We’ll see! I’ll have the matter taken to court, and then I’ll
show you!
CHUBUKOV : To court? You can take it to court, and all that! You can!
I know you; you’re just on the look-out for a chance to go
2019-20LOMOV
:
CHUBUKOV :
NATALYA
:
CHUBUKOV :
LOMOV
:
CHUBUKOV :
:
NATALYA
CHUBUKOV :
NATALYA
:
CHUBUKOV :
LOMOV
:
CHUBUKOV :
NATALYA
:
NATALYA
:
CHUBUKOV :
NATALYA
:
CHUBUKOV :
NATALYA
:
CHUBUKOV :
NATALYA
:
CHUBUKOV :
2019-20
151
The Proposal
CHUBUKOV :
to court, and all that. You pettifogger! All your people
were like that! All of them!
Never mind about my people! The Lomovs have all been
honourable people, and not one has ever been tried for
embezzlement, like your grandfather!
You Lomovs have had lunacy in your family, all of you!
All, all, all!
Your grandfather was a drunkard, and your younger aunt,
Nastasya Mihailovna, ran away with an architect, and
so on...
And your mother was hump-backed. [Clutches at his heart]
Something pulling in my side... My head.... Help! Water!
Your father was a guzzling gambler!
And there haven’t been many backbiters to equal your
aunt!
My left foot has gone to sleep... You’re an intriguer....Oh,
my heart! And it’s an open secret that before the last
elections you bri... I can see stars... Where’s my hat?
It’s low! It’s dishonest! It’s mean!
And you’re just a malicious, doublefaced intriguer! Yes!
Here’s my hat. My heart! Which way? Where’s the door?
Oh I think I’m dying! My foot’s quite numb...
[Goes to the door.]
[following him] And don’t set foot in my house again!
Take it to court! We’ll see!
[Lomov staggers out.]
Devil take him!
[Walks about in excitement.]
What a rascal! What trust can one have in one’s
neighbours after that!
The villain! The scarecrow!
The monster! First he takes our land and then he has
the impudence to abuse us.
And that blind hen, yes, that turnip-ghost has the
confounded cheek to make a proposal, and so on! What?
A proposal!
What proposal?
Why, he came here to propose to you.
To propose? To me? Why didn’t you tell me so before?
So he dresses up in evening clothes. The stuffed sausage!
The wizen-faced frump!First Flight
NATALYA
152
: To propose to me? Ah! [Falls into an easy-chair and wails]
Bring him back! Back! Ah! Bring him here.
CHUBUKOV : Bring whom here?
NATALYA
: Quick, quick! I’m ill! Fetch him!
[Hysterics.]
CHUBUKOV : What’s that? What’s the matter with you? [Clutches at
his head] Oh, unhappy man that I am! I’ll shoot myself!
I’ll hang myself! We’ve done for her!
NATALYA
: I’m dying! Fetch him!
CHUBUKOV : Tfoo! At once. Don’t yell!
[Runs out. A pause.]
NATALYA
: [Natalya Stepanovna wails.] What have they done to me?
Fetch him back! Fetch him!
[A pause. Chubukov runs in.]
CHUBUKOV : He’s coming, and so on, devil take him! Ouf! Talk to him
yourself; I don’t want to...
NATALYA
: [wails] Fetch him!
CHUBUKOV : [yells] He’s coming, I tell you. Oh, what a burden, Lord, to
be the father of a grown-up daughter! I’ll cut my throat I
will, indeed! We cursed him, abused him, drove him out;
and it’s all you... you!
NATALYA
: No, it was you!
CHUBUKOV : I tell you it’s not my fault. [Lomov appears at the door]
Now you talk to him yourself.
[Exit.]
LOMOV
: [Lomov enters, exhausted.] My heart’s palpitating awfully.
My foot’s gone to sleep. There’s something that keeps
pulling in my side....
NATALYA
: Forgive us, Ivan Vassilevitch, we were all a little heated.
I remember now: Oxen Meadows... really are yours.
LOMOV
: My heart’s beating awfully. My Meadows... My eyebrows
are both twitching....
NATALYA
: The Meadows are yours, yes, yours. Do sit down. [They
sit] We were wrong.
LOMOV
: I did it on principle. My land is worth little to me, but the
principle...
NATALYA
: Yes, the principle, just so. Now let’s talk of something else.
LOMOV
: The more so as I have evidence. My aunt’s grandmother
gave the land to your father’s grandfather’s peasants...
NATALYA
: Yes, yes, let that pass. [aside] I wish I knew how to get
him started. [aloud] Are you going to start shooting soon?
2019-20LOMOV
NATALYA
LOMOV
NATALYA
LOMOV
NATALYA
LOMOV
NATALYA
LOMOV
NATALYA
LOMOV
NATALYA
LOMOV
NATALYA
NATALYA
2019-20
153
The Proposal
LOMOV
: I’m thinking of having a go at the blackcock, honoured
Natalya Stepanovna, after the harvest. Oh, have you
heard? Just think, what a misfortune I’ve had! My dog
Guess, who you know, has gone lame.
: What a pity! Why?
: I don’t know. Must have got his leg twisted or bitten by
some other dog. [sighs] My very best dog, to say nothing
of the expense. I gave Mironov 125 roubles for him.
: It was too much, Ivan Vassilevitch.
: I think it was very cheap. He’s a first-rate dog.
: Papa gave 85 roubles for his Squeezer, and Squeezer is
heaps better than Guess!
: Squeezer better than Guess? What an idea! [laughs]
Squeezer better than Guess!
: Of course he’s better! Of course, Squeezer is young, he
may develop a bit, but on points and pedigree he’s better
than anything that even Volchanetsky has got.
: Excuse me, Natalya Stepanovna, but you forget that he
is overshot, and an overshot always means the dog is a
bad hunter!
: Overshot, is he? The first time I hear it!
: I assure you that his lower jaw is shorter than the upper.
: Have you measured?
: Yes. He’s all right at following, of course, but if you want
to get hold of anything...
: In the first place, our Squeezer is a thoroughbred animal,
the son of Harness and Chisels while there’s no getting
at the pedigree of your dog at all. He’s old and as ugly as
a worn-out cab-horse.
: He is old, but I wouldn’t take five Squeezers for him.
Why, how can you? Guess is a dog; as for Squeezer, well,
it’s too funny to argue. Anybody you like has a dog as
good as Squeezer... you may find them under every bush
almost. Twenty-five roubles would be a handsome price
to pay for him.
: There’s some demon of contradition in you today, Ivan
Vassilevitch. First you pretend that the Meadows are
yours; now, that Guess is better than Squeezer. I don’t
like people who don’t say what they mean, because
you know perfectly well that Squeezer is a hundred
times better than your silly Guess. Why do you want
to say he isn’t?First Flight
LOMOV
154
: I see, Natalya Stepanovna, that you consider me either
blind or a fool. You must realise that Squeezer is overshot!
NATALYA
: It’s not true.
LOMOV
: He is!
NATALYA
: It’s not true!
LOMOV
: Why shout madam?
NATALYA
: Why talk rot? It’s awful! It’s time your Guess was shot,
and you compare him with Squeezer!
LOMOV
: Excuse me, I cannot continue this discussion, my heart
is palpitating.
NATALYA
: I’ve noticed that those hunters argue most who know least.
LOMOV
: Madam, please be silent. My heart is going to pieces.
[shouts] Shut up!
NATALYA
: I shan’t shut up until you acknowledge that Squeezer is
a hundred times better than your Guess!
LOMOV
: A hundred times worse! Be hanged to your Squeezer! His
head... eyes... shoulder...
NATALYA
: There’s no need to hang your silly Guess; he’s half-dead
already!
LOMOV
: [weeps] Shut up! My heart’s bursting!
NATALYA
: I shan’t shut up.
[Enter Chubukov.]
CHUBUKOV : What’s the matter now?
NATALYA
: Papa, tell us truly, which is the better dog, our Squeezer
or his Guess.
LOMOV
: Stepan Stepanovitch, I implore you to tell me just one
thing: is your Squeezer overshot or not? Yes or no?
CHUBUKOV : And suppose he is? What does it matter? He’s the best dog
in the district for all that, and so on.
LOMOV
: But isn’t my Guess better? Really, now?
CHUBUKOV : Don’t excite yourself, my precious one. Allow me. Your
Guess certainly has his good points. He’s purebred, firm
on his feet, has well-sprung ribs, and all that. But, my
dear man, if you want to know the truth, that dog has
two defects: he’s old and he’s short in the muzzle.
LOMOV
: Excuse me, my heart... Let’s take the facts. You will
remember that on the Marusinsky hunt my Guess ran
neck-and-neck with the Count’s dog, while your Squeezer
was left a whole verst behind.
CHUBUKOV : He got left behind because the Count’s whipper-in hit
him with his whip.
2019-20LOMOV
2019-20
155
The Proposal
: And with good reason. The dogs are running after a fox,
when Squeezer goes and starts worrying a sheep!
CHUBUKOV : It’s not true! My dear fellow, I’m very liable to lose my
temper, and so, just because of that, let’s stop arguing.
You started because everybody is always jealous of
everybody else’s dogs. Yes, we’re all like that! You too, sir,
aren’t blameless! You no sooner begin with this, that and
the other, and all that... I remember everything!
LOMOV
: I remember too!
CHUBUKOV : [teasing him] I remember, too! What do you remember?
LOMOV
: My heart... my foot’s gone to sleep. I can’t...
NATALYA
: [teasing] My heart! What sort of a hunter are you? You
ought to go and lie on the kitchen oven and catch black
beetles, not go after foxes! My heart!
CHUBUKOV : Yes really, what sort of a hunter are you, anyway? You
ought to sit at home with your palpitations, and not go
tracking animals. You could go hunting, but you only go
to argue with people and interfere with their dogs and so
on. Let’s change the subject in case I lose my temper.
You’re not a hunter at all, anyway!
LOMOV
: And are you a hunter? You only go hunting to get in with
the Count and to intrigue. Oh, my heart! You’re an
intriguer!
CHUBUKOV : What? I am an intriguer? [shouts] Shut up!
LOMOV
: Intriguer!
CHUBUKOV : Boy! Pup!
LOMOV
: Old rat! Jesuit!
CHUBUKOV : Shut up or I’ll shoot you like a partridge! You fool!
LOMOV
: Everybody knows that — oh, my heart! — your late wife
used to beat you... My feet... temples... sparks... I fall,
I fall!
CHUBUKOV : And you’re under the slipper of your house-keeper!
LOMOV
: There, there, there... my heart’s burst! My shoulders come
off! Where is my shoulder? I die. [Falls into an armchair] A
doctor!
CHUBUKOV : Boy! Milksop! Fool! I’m sick! [Drinks water] Sick!
NATALYA
: What sort of a hunter are you? You can’t even sit on a
horse! [To her father] Papa, what’s the matter with him?
Papa! Look, Papa! [screams] Ivan Vassilevitch! He’s dead!
CHUBUKOV : I’m sick! I can’t breathe! Air!First Flight
NATALYA
156
: He’s dead. [Pulls Lomov’s sleeve] Ivan Vassilevitch! Ivan
Vassilevitch! What have you done to me? He’s dead. [Falls
into an armchair] A doctor, a doctor!
[Hysterics.]
CHUBUKOV : Oh! What is it? What’s the matter?
NATALYA
: [wails] He’s dead... dead!
CHUBUKOV : Who’s dead? [Looks at Lomov] So he is! My word! Water!
A doctor! [Lifts a tumbler to Lomov’s mouth] Drink this!
No, he doesn’t drink. It means he’s dead, and all that.
I’m the most unhappy of men! Why don’t I put a bullet
into my brain? Why haven’t I cut my throat yet? What
am I waiting for? Give me a knife! Give me a pistol! [Lomov
moves] He seems to be coming round. Drink some water!
That’s right.
LOMOV
: I see stars... mist... where am I?
CHUBUKOV : Hurry up and get married and — well, to the devil with
you! She’s willing! [He puts Lomov’s hand into his
daughter’s] She’s willing and all that. I give you my
blessing and so on. Only leave me in peace!
LOMOV
: [getting up] Eh? What? To whom?
CHUBUKOV : She’s willing! Well? Kiss and be damned to you!
NATALYA
: [wails] He’s alive... Yes, yes, I’m willing.
CHUBUKOV : Kiss each other!
LOMOV
: Eh? Kiss whom? [They kiss] Very nice, too. Excuse me,
what’s it all about? Oh, now I understand ... my heart...
stars... I’m happy. Natalya Stepanovna... [Kisses her hand]
My foot’s gone to sleep.
NATALYA
: I... I’m happy too...
CHUBUKOV : What a weight off my shoulders, ouf!
NATALYA
: But, still you will admit now that Guess is worse than
Squeezer.
LOMOV
: Better!
NATALYA
: Worse!
CHUBUKOV : Well, that’s a way to start your family bliss! Have some
champagne!
LOMOV
: He’s better!
NATALYA
: Worse! Worse! Worse!
CHUBUKOV : [trying to shout her down] Champagne! Champagne!
CURTAIN
2019-201. What does Chubukov at first suspect that Lomov has come for? Is he sincere
when he later says “And I’ve always loved you, my angel, as if you were my
own son”? Find reasons for your answer from the play.
2. Chubukov says of Natalya: “... as if she won’t consent! She’s in love;
egad, she’s like a lovesick cat…” Would you agree? Find reasons for
your answer.
3.
(i) Find all the words and expressions in the play that the characters
use to speak about each other, and the accusations and insults
they hurl at each other. (For example, Lomov in the end calls
Chubukov an intriguer; but earlier, Chubukov has himself called
Lomov a “malicious, doublefaced intriguer.” Again, Lomov begins by
describing Natalya as “an excellent housekeeper, not bad-looking,
well-educated.”)
(ii) Then think of five adjectives or adjectival expressions of your own to
describe each character in the play.
(iii) Can you now imagine what these characters will quarrel about next?
I. 1. This play has been translated into English from the Russian original.
Are there any expressions or ways of speaking that strike you as more
Russian than English? For example, would an adult man be addressed
by an older man as my darling or my treasure in an English play?
157
Read through the play carefully, and find expressions that you think
are not used in contemporary English, and contrast these with
idiomatic modern English expressions that also occur in the play.
palpitationsinterfereimplorethoroughbred
pedigreeprincipleevidencemisfortune
maliciousembezzlementarchitectneighbours
accustomedtemporarybehaviourdocuments
3. Look up the following phrases in a dictionary to find out their meaning,
and then use each in a sentence of your own.
(i) You may take it that
(ii) He seems to be coming round
(iii) My foot’s gone to sleep
2019-20
The Proposal
2. Look up the following words in a dictionary and find out how to pronounce
them. Pay attention to how many syllables there are in each word, and
find out which syllable is stressed, or said more forcefully.II. Reported Speech
A sentence in reported speech consists of two parts: a reporting clause,
which contains the reporting verb, and the reported clause. Look at the
following sentences.
(a) “I went to visit my grandma last week,” said Mamta.
(b) Mamta said that she had gone to visit her grandma the previous week.
In sentence (a), we have Mamta’s exact words. This is an example of direct
speech. In sentence (b), someone is reporting what Mamta said. This is
called indirect speech or reported speech. A sentence in reported speech
is made up of two parts — a reporting clause and a reported clause.
In sentence (b), Mamta said is the reporting clause containing the reporting
verb said. The other clause — that she had gone to visit her grandma last
week — is the reported clause.
First Flight
Notice that in sentence (b) we put the reporting clause first. This is done to
show that we are not speaking directly, but reporting someone else’s words.
The tense of the verb also changes; past tense (went) becomes past perfect
(had gone).
158
Here are some pairs of sentences in direct and reported speech. Read them
carefully, and do the task that follows:
1.
(i) LOMOV
: Honoured Stepan Stepanovitch, do you think I may count
on her consent? (Direct Speech)
(ii) Lomov asked Stepan Stepanovitch respectfully if he thought he might
count on her consent. (Reported Speech)
2.(i) LOMOV
: I’m getting a noise in my ears from excitement. (Direct
Speech)
(ii) Lomov said that he was getting a noise in his ears from excitement.
(Reported Speech)
3.(i) NATALYA
: Why haven’t you been here for such a long time? (Direct
Speech)
(ii) Natalya Stepanovna asked why he hadn’t been there for such a long
time. (Reported Speech)
4.(i) CHUBUKOV : What’s the matter? (Direct Speech)
(ii) Chubukov asked him what the matter was. (Reported Speech)
5.(i) NATALYA : My mowers will be there this very day! (Direct Speech)
(ii) Natalya Stepanovna declared that her mowers would be there that
very day. (Reported Speech)
You must have noticed that when we report someone’s exact words, we
have to make some changes in the sentence structure. In the following
sentences fill in the blanks to list the changes that have occurred in
the above pairs of sentences. One has been done for you.
2019-201. To report a question, we use the reporting verb
Sentence Set 1).
(as in
.
2. To report a statement, we use the reporting verb
3. The adverb of place here changes to
asked
.
4. When the verb in direct speech is in the present tense, the verb in reported
speech is in the
tense (as in Sentence Set 3).
5. If the verb in direct speech is in the present continuous tense, the verb
tense. For example,
in reported speech changes to
changes to was getting.
6. When the sentence in direct speech contains a word denoting respect, we
add the adverb
in the reporting clause (as in Sentence Set 1).
7. The pronouns I, me, our and mine, which are used in the first person in
direct speech, change according to the subject or object of the reporting
verb such as
,
,
or
in
reported speech.
III. Here is an excerpt from an article from the Times of India dated
27 August 2006. Rewrite it, changing the sentences in direct speech
into reported speech. Leave the other sentences unchanged.
1. Anger Management: As adults, one important thing to learn is how to manage
our temper. Some of us tend to get angry quickly, while others remain calm.
Can you think of three ill effects that result from anger? Note them down.
Suggest ways to avoid losing your temper in such situations. Are there any
benefits from anger?
2. In pairs, prepare a script based on the given excerpt from The Home and the
World by Rabindranath Tagore. You may write five exchanges between the
characters with other directions such as movements on stage and way of
speaking, etc.
2019-20
159
The Proposal
“Why do you want to know my age? If people know I am so old, I won’t get
work!” laughs 90-year-old A. K. Hangal, one of Hindi cinema’s most famous
character actors. For his age, he is rather energetic. “What’s the secret?”
we ask. “My intake of everything is in small quantities. And I walk a lot,”
he replies. “I joined the industry when people retire. I was in my 40s. So
I don’t miss being called a star. I am still respected and given work,
when actors of my age are living in poverty and without work. I don’t
have any complaints,” he says, adding, “but yes, I have always been
underpaid.” Recipient of the Padma Bhushan, Hangal never hankered
after money or materialistic gains. “No doubt I am content today, but
money is important. I was a fool not to understand the value of money
earlier,” he regrets.First Flight
160
One afternoon, when I happened to be specially busy, word came to
my office room that Bimala had sent for me. I was startled.
“Who did you say had sent for me?” I asked the messenger.
“The Rani Mother”.
“The Bara Rani?”
“No, sir, the Chota Rani Mother.”
The Chota Rani! It seemed a century since I had been sent for by her.
I kept them all waiting there, and went off into the inner apartments.
When I stepped into our room I had another shock of surprise to find
Bimala there with a distinct suggestion of being dressed up. The room,
which from persistent neglect, had latterly acquired an air of having
grown absent-minded, had regained something of its old order this
afternoon. I stood there silently, looking enquiringly at Bimala.
She flushed a little and the fingers of her right hand toyed for a time
with the bangles on her left arm. Then she abruptly broke the silence.
“Look here! Is it right that ours should be the only market in all Bengal
which allows foreign goods?”
“What, then, would be the right thing to do?” I asked.
“Order them to be cleared out!”
“But the goods are not mine.”
“Is not the market yours?”
“It is much more theirs who use it for trade.”
“Let them trade in Indian goods, then.”
“Nothing would please me better. But suppose they do not?”
“Nonsense! How dare they be so insolent? Are you not…”
“I am very busy this afternoon and cannot stop to argue it out. But I
must refuse to tyrannise.”
“It would not be tyranny for selfish gain, but for the sake of the
country.”
“To tyrannise for the country is to tyrannise over the country. But
that I am afraid you will never understand.” With this I came away.
3. In groups, discuss the qualities one should look for in a marriage partner.
You might consider the following points.
• Personal qualities
– Appearance or looks
– Attitudes and beliefs
– Sense of humour
• Value system
– Compassion and kindness
– Tolerance, ambition
– Attitude to money and wealth
• Education and professional background
4. Are there parts of the play that remind you of film scenes from romantic
comedies? Discuss this in groups, and recount to the rest of the class
episodes similar to those in the play.
2019-20WHAT WE HAVE DONE
Given you a play by the famous Russian writer, Anton Chekhov.
WHAT YOU CAN D O
Dictate the biogrophical information given below. Students should then guess the
name of the playwright.
(1564 – 1616). He was born at Stratford-on-Avon in April 1564. His
father was an important public figure in Stratford. People believe that he received a
decent grammar-school education in literature, logic, and Latin (mathematics and
natural science did not form part of the curriculum). When he was eighteen, he married
Anne Hathaway, who was eight years his senior. He seems to have prospered in the
London theatre world. He probably began his career as an actor in London, and he
earned enough as author to acquire landed property.
When he was forty-seven, he retired to a large house in Stratford. He died in
1616, leaving behind a body of work that still stands as a pinnacle in world literature.
161
Homophones
• They were too close to the door to close it.
• Since there is no time like the present, she
thought it was time to present the present.
2019-20
The Proposal
Can you find the words below that are spelt
similarly, and sometimes even pronounced
similarly, but have very different meanings? Check
their pronunciation and meaning in a dictionary.Notes
2019-20