2019-20ISBN 81-7450-524-5
First Edition
February 2006
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
Phalguna 1927
Reprinted
October 2006 Kartika 1928
October 2007 Kartika 1929
January 2009 Pausa 1930
January 2010 Magha 1931
January 2011 Pausa 1932
February 2012 Phalguna 1933
November 2012 Kartika 1934
November 2013 Kartika 1935
December 2014 Pausa 1936
December 2015 Agrahayana 1937
October 2016 Kartika 1938
December 2017 Agrahayana 1939
December 2018 Agrahayana 1940
qNo part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the
publisher.
qThis book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,
be lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s
consent, in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is
published.
qThe correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any
revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means
is incorrect and should be unacceptable.
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
PD 450T BS
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2006
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New Delhi 110 016Phone : 011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O. Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014Phone : 079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114Phone : 033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021Phone : 0361-2674869
Publication Team
Head, Publication
` ??.??
: M. Siraj Anwar
Division
Chief Editor: Shveta Uppal
Chief Business: Gautam Ganguly
Manager
Chief Production
: Arun Chitkara
Officer (In-charge)
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermark
Editor
Published at the Publication Division by
the Secretary, National Council of
Educational Research and Training,
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi
110016 and printed at Royal Offset
Printers, A-89/1, Naraina Industrial
Area, Phase-I, New Delhi-110028
: Vijayam
Sankaranarayanan
Assistant Production : A. M. Vinod Kumar
Officer
2019-20
Illustrations
Rajeev Kumar
Cover and Layout
Shweta RaoForeword
THE National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends that
children's life at school must be linked to their life outside the school.
This principle marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learning
which continues to shape our system and causes a gap between
the school, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks
developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this
basic idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning and the
maintenance of sharp boundaries between different subject areas.
We hope these measures will take us significantly further in the
direction of a child-centred system of education outlined in the
National Policy of Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school
principals and teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on
their own learning and to pursue imaginative activities and questions.
We must recognise that, given space, time and freedom, children
generate new knowledge by engaging with the information passed on
to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis
of examination is one of the key reasons why other resources and
sites of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is
possible if we perceive and treat children as participants in learning,
not as receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and
mode of functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary
as rigour in implementing the annual calendar so that the required
number of teaching days are actually devoted to teaching. The
methods used for teaching and evaluation will also determine how
effective this textbook proves for making children’s life at school a
happy experience, rather than a source of stress or boredom.
Syllabus designers have tried to address the problem of curricular
burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different
stages with greater consideration for child psychology and the time
available for teaching. The textbook attempts to enhance this
endeavour by giving higher priority and space to opportunities for
contemplation and wondering, discussion in small groups, and
activities requiring hands-on experience.
2019-20iv
The National Council of Educational Research and Training
(NCERT) appreciates the hard work done by the textbook
development committee responsible for this book. We wish to
thank the Chairperson of the advisory group in languages,
Professor Namwar Singh and the Chief Advisor for this book,
Professor R. Amritavalli for guiding the work of this committee.
Several teachers contributed to the development of this textbook;
we are grateful to their principals for making this possible. We
are indebted to the institutions and organisations which have
generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, materials
and personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of the
National Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of
Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource
Development under the Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri
and Professor G.P. Deshpande for their valuable time and
contribution. As an organisation committed to systemic reform
and continuous improvement in the quality of its products,
NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which will enable
us to undertake further revision and refinements.
New Delhi
20 December 2005
Director
National Council of Educational
Research and Training
2019-20About the Book
THIS textbook for Class XI is based on the English syllabus on the
lines suggested by the National Curriculum Framework, 2005.
It aims to help learners develop proficiency in English by
using language as an instrument for abstract thought and
knowledge acquisition.
In the Reading Skills section, the texts have been chosen to
mirror the kind of serious reading in real life that a school-leaver
should be capable of. The prose pieces are drawn from biographies,
travelogues, science fiction, art and contemporary expository prose
by writers from different parts of the world. Samples from journalistic
writing have also been included. The play, placed centrally in the
textbook, is on a theme that learners will particularly identify with
and is in a lighter vein. The poems relate to universal sentiments
and appeal to contemporary sensibilities.
Learners at this stage bring along with them a rich resource of
world-view, knowledge and cognitive strategies. Teachers should
encourage them to make educated guesses at what they read and
help them initially to make sense of the language of the text and
subsequently become autonomous readers. The Notes after every
Unit help the teacher and learners with strategies for dealing with
the particular piece.
The activities suggested draw upon the learners’ multilingual
experiences and capacities. Comprehension is addressed at two
levels: one of the text itself and the other of how the text relates to
the learners’ experience. The vocabulary exercises will sensitise
learners to make informed choices of words, while the points of
grammar highlighted will help them notice the use of forms. The
‘Things to Do’ section at the end of every unit invites learners to
look for other sources of information that will help them deal with
learning tasks across the curriculum.
The section on Writing Skills prepares them for the kind of
independent writing that a school-leaver will need to engage in for
academic as well as real-life purposes. Help has been provided in a
step-by-step manner to lead the learners on to make notes,
summarise, draft letters and write short essays, paying attention to
the form, content and the process of writing.
2019-202019-20Textbook Development
Committee
CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY GROUP FOR TEXTBOOKS IN LANGUAGES
Professor Namwar Singh, formerly Chairman, School of Languages,
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
CHIEF ADVISOR
R. Amritavalli, Professor, English and Foreign Languages University
(EFLU), Hyderabad
CHIEF COORDINATOR
Ram Janma Sharma, Former Professor and Head, Department of
Education in Languages, NCERT, New Delhi
MEMBERS
Indu Khetarpal, Principal, Salwan Public School, Gurgaon
Malathy Krishnan, Reader, EFLU, Hyderabad
Nasiruddin Khan, Reader (Retd.), NCERT, New Delhi
Rashmi Mishra, PGT (English), Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya,
P.O. Kalamati, Sambalpur
MEMBER – COORDINATOR
Meenakshi Khar, Assistant Professor of English, Department of
Education in Languages, NCERT, New Delhi
2019-20Acknowledgements
THE National Council of Educational Research and Training is grateful
to Professor M.L. Tickoo, formerly of the Central Institute of English
and Foreign Languages, Hyderabad, and the Regional Language
Centre, Singapore; Geetha Kumar, PGT, The Mothers’ International
School; and Vandana Singh, Consultant Editor for going through the
manuscript and making valuable suggestions.
For permission to reproduce copyright material in this book
NCERT would like to thank the following: Pergamon Press (Aust) for
‘A Photograph’ by Shirley Toulson and ‘Father to Son’ by Elizabeth
Jennings; Oxford University Press for ‘We’re Not Afraid to Die... if
We Can Be Together’ by Gordon Cook and Alan East; National
Geographic Society for ‘Discovering Tut: the Saga Continues’ by
A.R. Williams and ‘Green Sahara’ by Joel Achenbach; Oxford
University Press for ‘The Laburnum Top’ by Ted Hughes and
‘Childhood’ by Markus Natten; The India International Society for
‘Landscape of the Soul’ by Nathalie Trouveroy; New York University
Press for ‘The Voice of the Rain’ by Walt Whitman; Bhartiya Vidya
Bhavan for ‘The Ailing Planet’ by Nani Palkhivala; The Gale Group
Inc. for ‘The Browning Version’ by Terence Rattigan; Publishers
Witness Books for ‘The Adventure’ by Jayant Narlikar; John Murray
for ‘Silk Road’ by Nick Middleton; Editor-in-Chief, The Hindu for
‘A New Deal for Old Cities’ by G.Ananthakrishnan; HT Media Ltd for
‘Getting Inside Outsider Art’ by Brinda Suri.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training,
New Delhi, acknowledges the services of Sunanda Khanna,
Copy Editor; Surender K. Vats, Proof Reader; Mohammad Harun and
Uttam Kumar, DTP Operators; and Parash Ram Kaushik, Incharge,
Computer Station. The efforts of the Publication Department, NCERT
are also highly appreciated.
2019-20Contents
FOREWORDiii
ABOUT THE BOOKv
READING SKILLS1– 86
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
The Portrait of a Lady
KHUSHWANT SINGH3
A Photograph
SHIRLEY TOULSON11
We’re Not Afraid to Die...
if We Can All Be Together
GORDON COOK and ALAN EAST13
Discovering Tut: the
Saga Continues
A.R. WILLIAMS22
The Laburnum Top
TED HUGHES31
Landscape of the Soul
NATHALIE TROUVEROY34
The Voice of the Rain
WALT WHITMAN41
The Ailing Planet: the
Green Movement’s Role
NANI PALKHIVALA
2019-20
43x
6.
The Browning Version
TERENCE RATTIGAN50
Childhood
MARKUS NATTEN58
7.The Adventure
JAYANT NARLIKAR60
8.Silk Road
NICK MIDDLETON74
Father to Son
ELIZABETH JENNINGS85
WRITING SKILLS
87 – 118
1.Note-making89
2.Summarising94
3.Sub-titling99
4.Essay-writing102
5.Letter-writing107
6.Creative Writing116
2019-20The Portrait of a Lady
A Photograph
“We’re Not Afraid to Die... if We
Can All Be Together”
Discovering Tut: the Saga Continues
The Laburnum Top
Landscape of the Soul
The Voice of the Rain
The Ailing Planet: the Green
Movement’s Role
The Browning Version
Childhood
The Adventure
Silk Road
Father to Son
2019-202
HORNBILL
Effective reading is receiving from others
their ideas and feelings.
Effective reading involves
³understanding the text
³talking about the text
³thinking about language
³working with words
³noticing form and patterns.
2019-20T HE POR TRAIT OF A L ADY
3
1. The Portrait of a Lady
Khushwant Singh
Notice these expressions in the text.
Infer their meaning from the context.
the thought was almost revolting
a veritable bedlam of chirrupings
frivolous rebukes
³ an expanse of pure white serenity
³ the sagging skins of the dilapidated
³ a turning-point
drum
³ accepted her seclusion with
resignation
³
³
³
MY grandmother, like everybody’s grandmother, was an old
woman. She had been old and wrinkled for the twenty years
that I had known her. People said that she had once been
young and pretty and had even had a husband, but that was
hard to believe. My grandfather’s portrait hung above the
mantelpiece in the drawing room. He wore a big turban and
loose-fitting clothes. His long, white beard covered the best
part of his chest and he looked at least a hundred years old.
He did not look the sort of person who would have a wife or
children. He looked as if he could only have lots and lots of
grandchildren. As for my grandmother being young and pretty,
the thought was almost revolting. She often told us of the
games she used to play as a child. That seemed quite absurd
and undignified on her part and we treated it like the fables
of the Prophets she used to tell us.
She had always been short and fat and slightly bent. Her
face was a criss-cross of wrinkles running from everywhere to
everywhere. No, we were certain she had always been as we had
2019-204
HORNBILL
known her. Old, so terribly old that she could not have grown
older, and had stayed at the same age for twenty years. She
could never have been pretty; but she was always beautiful.
She hobbled about the house in spotless white with one hand
resting on her waist to balance her stoop and the other telling
the beads of her rosary. Her silver locks were scattered untidily
over her pale, puckered face, and her lips constantly moved in
inaudible prayer. Yes, she was beautiful. She was like the winter
landscape in the mountains, an expanse of pure white serenity
breathing peace and contentment.
My grandmother and I were good friends. My parents left me
with her when they went to live in the city and we were constantly
together. She used to wake me up in the morning and get me
ready for school. She said her morning prayer in a monotonous
sing-song while she bathed and dressed me in the hope that I
would listen and get to know it by heart; I listened because I
loved her voice but never bothered to learn it. Then she would
fetch my wooden slate which she had already washed and
plastered with yellow chalk, a tiny earthen ink-pot and a red
pen, tie them all in a bundle and hand it to me. After a breakfast
of a thick, stale chapatti with a little butter and sugar spread on
it, we went to school. She carried several stale chapattis with
her for the village dogs.
My grandmother always went to school with me because
the school was attached to the temple. The priest taught us
the alphabet and the morning prayer. While the children sat in
rows on either side of the verandah singing the alphabet or the
prayer in a chorus, my grandmother sat inside reading the
scriptures. When we had both finished, we would walk back
together. This time the village dogs would meet us at the temple
door. They followed us to our home growling and fighting with
each other for the chapattis we threw to them.
When my parents were comfortably settled in the city, they
sent for us. That was a turning-point in our friendship. Although
we shared the same room, my grandmother no longer came to
school with me. I used to go to an English school in a motor
bus. There were no dogs in the streets and she took to feeding
sparrows in the courtyard of our city house.
As the years rolled by we saw less of each other. For some
time she continued to wake me up and get me ready for school.
When I came back she would ask me what the teacher had
2019-20T HE PORTRAIT OF A LADY
5
taught me. I would tell her English words and little things of
western science and learning, the law of gravity, Archimedes’
Principle, the world being round, etc. This made her unhappy.
She could not help me with my lessons. She did not believe in
the things they taught at the English school and was distressed
that there was no teaching about God and the scriptures. One
day I announced that we were being given music lessons. She
was very disturbed. To her music had lewd associations. It was
the monopoly of harlots and beggars and not meant for gentlefolk.
She said nothing but her silence meant disapproval. She rarely
talked to me after that.
When I went up to University, I was given a room of my own.
The common link of friendship was snapped. My grandmother
accepted her seclusion with resignation. She rarely left her
spinning-wheel to talk to anyone. From sunrise to sunset she
sat by her wheel spinning and reciting prayers. Only in the
afternoon she relaxed for a while to feed the sparrows. While
she sat in the verandah breaking the bread into little bits,
hundreds of little birds collected round her creating a veritable
bedlam of chirrupings. Some came and perched on her legs,
others on her shoulders. Some even sat on her head. She smiled
but never shooed them away. It used to be the happiest half-
hour of the day for her.
When I decided to go abroad for further studies, I was sure
my grandmother would be upset. I would be away for five years,
and at her age one could never tell. But my grandmother could.
She was not even sentimental. She came to leave me at the
railway station but did not talk or show any emotion. Her lips
moved in prayer, her mind was lost in prayer. Her fingers were
busy telling the beads of her rosary. Silently she kissed my
forehead, and when I left I cherished the moist imprint as perhaps
the last sign of physical contact between us.
But that was not so. After five years I came back home and
was met by her at the station. She did not look a day older. She
still had no time for words, and while she clasped me in her
arms I could hear her reciting her prayers. Even on the first day
of my arrival, her happiest moments were with her sparrows
whom she fed longer and with frivolous rebukes.
In the evening a change came over her. She did not pray.
She collected the women of the neighbourhood, got an old drum
and started to sing. For several hours she thumped the sagging
2019-206
HORNBILL
skins of the dilapidated drum and sang of the home-coming
of warriors. We had to persuade her to stop to avoid
overstraining. That was the first time since I had known her
that she did not pray.
The next morning she was taken ill. It was a mild fever and
the doctor told us that it would go. But my grandmother thought
differently. She told us that her end was near. She said that,
since only a few hours before the close of the last chapter of her
life she had omitted to pray, she was not going to waste any
more time talking to us.
We protested. But she ignored our protests. She lay peacefully
in bed praying and telling her beads. Even before we could
suspect, her lips stopped moving and the rosary fell from her
lifeless fingers. A peaceful pallor spread on her face and we knew
that she was dead.
We lifted her off the bed and, as is customary, laid her on
the ground and covered her with a red shroud. After a few hours
of mourning we left her alone to make arrangements for her
funeral. In the evening we went to her room with a crude stretcher
to take her to be cremated. The sun was setting and had lit her
room and verandah with a blaze of golden light. We stopped
half-way in the courtyard. All over the verandah and in her room
right up to where she lay dead and stiff wrapped in the red
shroud, thousands of sparrows sat scattered on the floor. There
was no chirruping. We felt sorry for the birds and my mother
fetched some bread for them. She broke it into little crumbs,
the way my grandmother used to, and threw it to them. The
sparrows took no notice of the bread. When we carried my
grandmother’s corpse off, they flew away quietly. Next morning
the sweeper swept the bread crumbs into the dustbin.
Understanding the text
Mention
1. The three phases of the author’s relationship with his grandmother
before he left the country to study abroad.
2. Three reasons why the author’s grandmother was disturbed when
he started going to the city school.
2019-20T HE PORTRAIT OF A LADY
7
3. Three ways in which the author’s grandmother spent her days
after he grew up.
4. The odd way in which the author’s grandmother behaved just
before she died.
5. The way in which the sparrows expressed their sorrow when
the author’s grandmother died.
Talking about the text
Talk to your partner about the following.
1. The author’s grandmother was a religious person. What are the
different ways in which we come to know this?
2. Describe the changing relationship between the author and his
grandmother. Did their feelings for each other change?
3. Would you agree that the author’s grandmother was a person strong
in character? If yes, give instances that show this.
4. Have you known someone like the author’s grandmother? Do you
feel the same sense of loss with regard to someone whom you have
loved and lost?
Thinking about language
1. Which language do you think the author and his grandmother used
while talking to each other?
2. Which language do you use to talk to elderly relatives in your family?
3. How would you say ‘a dilapidated drum’ in your language?
4. Can you think of a song or a poem in your language that talks of
homecoming?
Working with words
I.
Notice the following uses of the word ‘tell’ in the text.
1. Her fingers were busy telling the beads of her rosary.
2. I would tell her English words and little things of Western science
and learning.
3. At her age one could never tell.
4. She told us that her end was near.
2019-208
HORNBILL
Given below are four different senses of the word ‘tell’. Match
the meanings to the uses listed above.
1. make something known to someone in spoken or written words
2. count while reciting
3. be sure
4. give information to somebody
II. Notice the different senses of the word ‘take’.
1. to take to something: to begin to do something as a habit
2. to take ill: to suddenly become ill
Locate these phrases in the text and notice the way they are
used.
III. The word ‘hobble’ means to walk with difficulty because the legs
and feet are in bad condition.
Tick the words in the box below that also refer to a manner of walking.
haggleshufflestrideridewaddle
wrigglepaddleswaggertrudgeslog
Noticing form
Notice the form of the verbs italicised in these sentences.
1. My grandmother was an old woman. She had been old and wrinkled
for the twenty years that I had known her. People said that she had
once been young and pretty and had even had a husband, but that
was hard to believe.
2. When we both had finished we would walk back together.
3. When I came back she would ask me what the teacher had
taught me.
4. It was the first time since I had known her that she did not pray.
5. The sun was setting and had lit her room and verandah with a
golden light.
These are examples of the past perfect forms of verbs. When we recount
things in the distant past we use this form.
2019-20T HE PORTRAIT OF A LADY
9
Things to do
Talk with your family members about elderly people who you have
been intimately connected with and who are not there with you now.
Write a short description of someone you liked a lot.
Notes
Understanding the text
The tasks cover the entire text and help in summarising the various
phases of the autobiographical account and are based on the facts
presented.
lAsk the students to read the text silently, paragraph by paragraph,
and get a quick oral feedback on what the main points of each are.
For example: Para1– description of grandmother and grandfather’s
photograph.
lAt the end of the unit ask students to answer the comprehension
questions first orally and then in writing in point form.
For example, when he went to the:
– village school
– city school
– university
Talking about the text
Peer interaction about the text is necessary before students engage in
writing tasks. The questions raised in this section elicit subjective
responses to the facts in the text and also open up possibilities for relating
the events to the reader’s own life and establish the universality of the
kind of relationship and feelings described in the text.
Thinking about language
The questions here try to:
lmake the reader visualise the language that must have been used
by the author and his grandmother
lthink about their own home language
2019-2010
HORNBILL
lfind equivalents in their language for English phrases
lrelate to songs with emotional import in their own language.
Working with words
Highlight different uses of common words like ‘tell’ and ‘take’; words
used for different ways of walking; and semantically-related word
groups. You could add to the items by using the dictionary for
vocabulary enrichment.
Noticing form
Make students notice the use of the past perfect form of the verb that
frequently appear in the text to recount the remote past. You could
practise the form with other examples.
Things to do
Relating the topic of the text to the reader’s real-life experience; writing
about a person who one holds dear.
2019-20T HE PORTRAIT OF A LADY
11
A Photograph
Shirley Toulson
The cardboard shows me how it was
When the two girl cousins went paddling,
Each one holding one of my mother’s hands,
And she the big girl — some twelve years or so.
All three stood still to smile through their hair
At the uncle with the camera. A sweet face,
My mother’s, that was before I was born.
And the sea, which appears to have changed less,
Washed their terribly transient feet.
Some twenty — thirty — years later
She’d laugh at the snapshot. “See Betty
And Dolly,” she’d say, “and look how they
Dressed us for the beach.” The sea holiday
Was her past, mine is her laughter. Both wry
With the laboured ease of loss.
Now she’s been dead nearly as many years
As that girl lived. And of this circumstance
There is nothing to say at all.
Its silence silences.
Infer the meanings of the following words from the context.
paddling
transient
Now look up the dictionary to see if your inference is right.
2019-2012
HORNBILL
Think it out
1. What does the word ‘cardboard’ denote in the poem? Why has
this word been used?
2. What has the camera captured?
3. What has not changed over the years? Does this suggest
something to you?
4. The poet’s mother laughed at the snapshot. What did this laugh
indicate?
5. What is the meaning of the line “Both wry with the laboured ease of
loss.”
6. What does “this circumstance” refer to?
7. The three stanzas depict three different phases. What are they?
Notes
Poems are included to heighten students’ sensitivity to literary
writing and to appreciate rhythm and sound patterns in language.
Follow these steps:
lRead the poem aloud once without the students looking at the
poem. Ask them a few general questions.
lRe-read the poem with the students looking at the poem. Ask a
few more questions to check comprehension.
lAsk students to read the poem silently and answer the questions
given, first orally and then in writing.
lThe poem ‘A Photograph’ is placed after ‘The Portrait of a Lady’
because of the thematic relation between the two.
lThe questions seek to examine factual and inferential
comprehension, establish empathy and draw attention to the
structure of the poem and choice of words.
2019-20WE’RE NOT AFRAID TO DIE ...
13
2. “We’re Not Afraid to Die...
if We Can All Be Together”
Gordon Cook and Alan East
Notice these expressions in the text.
Infer their meaning from the context.
³honing our seafaring skills³pinpricks in the vast ocean
³ominous silence³a tousled head
³Mayday calls
IN July 1976, my wife Mary, son Jonathan, 6, daughter Suzanne,
7, and I set sail from Plymouth, England, to duplicate the round-
the-world voyage made 200 years earlier by Captain James Cook.
For the longest time, Mary and I — a 37-year-old businessman —
had dreamt of sailing in the wake of the famous explorer, and
for the past 16 years we had spent all our leisure time honing
our seafaring skills in British waters.
Our boat Wavewalker, a 23 metre, 30 ton wooden-hulled
beauty, had been professionally built, and we had spent months
fitting it out and testing it in the roughest weather we could find.
The first leg of our planned three-year, 105,000 kilometre
journey passed pleasantly as we sailed down the west coast of
Africa to Cape Town. There, before heading east, we took on two
crewmen — American Larry Vigil and Swiss Herb Seigler — to
help us tackle one of the world’s roughest seas, the southern
Indian Ocean.
2019-2014
HORNBILL
On our second day out of Cape Town, we began to encounter
strong gales. For the next few weeks, they blew continuously.
Gales did not worry me; but the size of the waves was alarming —
up to 15 metres, as high as our main mast.
December 25 found us 3,500 kilometres east of Cape Town.
Despite atrocious weather, we had a wonderful holiday complete
with a Christmas tree. New Year’s Day saw no improvement in
the weather, but we reasoned that it had to change soon. And it
did change — for the worse.
At dawn on January 2, the waves were gigantic. We were
sailing with only a small storm jib and were still making eight
knots. As the ship rose to the top of each wave we could see
endless enormous seas rolling towards us, and the screaming
of the wind and spray was painful to the ears. To slow the boat
down, we dropped the storm jib and lashed a heavy mooring
rope in a loop across the stern. Then we double-lashed
everything, went through our life-raft drill, attached lifelines,
donned oilskins and life jackets — and waited.
The first indication of impending disaster came at about
6 p.m., with an ominous silence. The wind dropped, and the
sky immediately grew dark. Then came a growing roar, and an
enormous cloud towered aft of the ship. With horror, I realised
that it was not a cloud, but a wave like no other I had ever seen.
It appeared perfectly vertical and almost twice the height of the
other waves, with a frightful breaking crest.
The roar increased to a thunder as the stern moved up the
face of the wave, and for a moment I thought we might ride over
it. But then a tremendous explosion shook the deck. A torrent
of green and white water broke over the ship, my head smashed
into the wheel and I was aware of flying overboard and sinking
below the waves. I accepted my approaching death, and as I
was losing consciousness, I felt quite peaceful.
Unexpectedly, my head popped out of the water. A few metres
away, Wavewalker was near capsizing, her masts almost
horizontal. Then a wave hurled her upright, my lifeline jerked
taut, I grabbed the guard rails and sailed through the air into
Wavewalker’s main boom. Subsequent waves tossed me around
the deck like a rag doll. My left ribs cracked; my mouth filled
with blood and broken teeth. Somehow, I found the wheel, lined
up the stern for the next wave and hung on.
Water, Water, Everywhere. I could feel that the ship had water
below, but I dared not abandon the wheel to investigate. Suddenly,
2019-20WE’RE NOT AFRAID TO DIE ...
15
the front hatch was thrown open and Mary appeared. “We’re sinking!”
she screamed. “The decks are smashed; we’re full of water.”
“Take the wheel”, I shouted as I scrambled for the hatch.
Larry and Herb were pumping like madmen. Broken timbers
hung at crazy angles, the whole starboard side bulged inwards;
clothes, crockery, charts, tins and toys sloshed about in deep water.
I half-swam, half-crawled into the children’s cabin. “Are you
all right?” I asked. “Yes,” they answered from an upper bunk.
“But my head hurts a bit,” said Sue, pointing to a big bump
above her eyes. I had no time to worry about bumped heads.
After finding a hammer, screws and canvas, I struggled back
on deck. With the starboard side bashed open, we were taking
water with each wave that broke over us. If I couldn’t make
some repairs, we would surely sink.
Somehow I managed to stretch canvas and secure waterproof
hatch covers across the gaping holes. Some water continued to
stream below, but most of it was now being deflected over the side.
More problems arose when our hand pumps started to block
up with the debris floating around the cabins and the electric
pump short-circuited. The water level rose threateningly. Back
on deck I found that our two spare hand pumps had been
wrenched overboard — along with the forestay sail, the jib, the
dinghies and the main anchor.
Then I remembered we had another electric pump under
the chartroom floor. I connected it to an out-pipe, and was
thankful to find that it worked.
The night dragged on with an endless, bitterly cold routine
of pumping, steering and working the radio. We were getting no
replies to our Mayday calls — which was not surprising in this
remote corner of the world.
Sue’s head had swollen alarmingly; she had two enormous
black eyes, and now she showed us a deep cut on her arm.
When I asked why she hadn’t made more of her injuries before
this, she replied, “I didn’t want to worry you when you were
trying to save us all.”
____________
By morning on January 3, the pumps had the water level
sufficiently under control for us to take two hours’ rest in
rotation. But we still had a tremendous leak somewhere below
the waterline and, on checking, I found that nearly all the boat’s
2019-2016
HORNBILL
main rib frames were smashed down to the keel. In fact, there
was nothing holding up a whole section of the starboard hull
except a few cupboard partitions.
We had survived for 15 hours since the wave hit, but
Wavewalker wouldn’t hold together long enough for us to reach
Australia. I checked our charts and calculated that there were
two small islands a few hundred kilometres to the east. One of
them, Ile Amsterdam, was a French scientific base. Our only
hope was to reach these pinpricks in the vast ocean. But unless
the wind and seas abated so we could hoist sail, our chances
would be slim indeed. The great wave had put our auxilliary
engine out of action.
On January 4, after 36 hours of continuous pumping, we
reached the last few centimetres of water. Now, we had only to
keep pace with the water still coming in. We could not set any
sail on the main mast. Pressure on the rigging would simply
pull the damaged section of the hull apart, so we hoisted the
storm jib and headed for where I thought the two islands were.
Mary found some corned beef and cracker biscuits, and we ate
our first meal in almost two days.
But our respite was short-lived. At 4 p.m. black clouds began
building up behind us; within the hour the wind was back to 40
knots and the seas were getting higher. The weather continued
to deteriorate throughout the night, and by dawn on January 5,
our situation was again desperate.
When I went in to comfort the children, Jon asked, “Daddy,
are we going to die?” I tried to assure him that we could make it.
“But, Daddy,” he went on, “we aren’t afraid of dying if we can all
be together — you and Mummy, Sue and I.”
I could find no words with which to respond, but I left the
children’s cabin determined to fight the sea with everything I
had. To protect the weakened starboard side, I decided to heave-
to — with the undamaged port hull facing the oncoming waves,
using an improvised sea anchor of heavy nylon rope and two 22
litre plastic barrels of paraffin.
That evening, Mary and I sat together holding hands, as the
motion of the ship brought more and more water in through the
broken planks. We both felt the end was very near.
But Wavewalker rode out the storm and by the morning of
January 6, with the wind easing, I tried to get a reading on the
sextant. Back in the chartroom, I worked on wind speeds,
2019-20WE’RE NOT AFRAID TO DIE ...
17
changes of course, drift and current in an effort to calculate our
position. The best I could determine was that we were somewhere
in 150,000 kilometres of ocean looking for a 65 kilometre-wide
island.
While I was thinking, Sue, moving painfully, joined me. The
left side of her head was now very swollen and her blackened
eyes narrowed to slits. She gave me a card she had made.
On the front she had drawn caricatures of Mary and me
with the words: “Here are some funny people. Did they make
you laugh? I laughed a lot as well.” Inside was a message: “Oh,
how I love you both. So this card is to say thank you and let’s
hope for the best.” Somehow we had to make it.
____________
I checked and rechecked my calculations. We had lost our main
compass and I was using a spare which had not been corrected
for magnetic variation. I made an allowance for this and another
estimate of the influence of the westerly currents which flow
through this part of the Indian Ocean.
About 2 p.m., I went on deck and asked Larry to steer a
course of 185 degrees. If we were lucky, I told him with a
conviction I did not feel, he could expect to see the island at
about 5 p.m.
Then with a heavy heart, I went below, climbed on my bunk
and amazingly, dozed off. When I woke it was 6 p.m., and growing
dark. I knew we must have missed the island, and with the sail
we had left, we couldn’t hope to beat back into the westerly winds.
At that moment, a tousled head appeared by my bunk. “Can I
have a hug?” Jonathan asked. Sue was right behind him.
“Why am I getting a hug now?” I asked.
“Because you are the best daddy in the whole world — and
the best captain,” my son replied.
“Not today, Jon, I’m afraid.”
“Why, you must be,” said Sue in a matter-of-fact voice. “You
found the island.”
“What!” I shouted.
“It’s out there in front of us,” they chorused, “as big as a
battleship.”
I rushed on deck and gazed with relief at the stark outline of
Ile Amsterdam. It was only a bleak piece of volcanic rock, with
little vegetation — the most beautiful island in the world!
2019-2018
HORNBILL
We anchored offshore for the night, and the next morning all
28 inhabitants of the island cheered as they helped us ashore.
With land under my feet again, my thoughts were full of
Larry and Herbie, cheerful and optimistic under the direst stress,
and of Mary, who stayed at the wheel for all those crucial hours.
Most of all, I thought of a seven-year-old girl, who did not want
us to worry about a head injury (which subsequently took six
minor operations to remove a recurring blood clot between skin
and skull), and of a six-year-old boy who was not afraid to die.
Understanding the text
1. List the steps taken by the captain
(i) to protect the ship when rough weather began.
(ii) to check the flooding of the water in the ship.
2. Describe the mental condition of the voyagers on 4 and 5 January.
3. Describe the shifts in the narration of the events as indicated in
the three sections of the text. Give a subtitle to each section.
Talking about the text
Discuss the following questions with your partner.
1. What difference did you notice between the reaction of the adults
and the children when faced with danger?
2. How does the story suggest that optimism helps to endure “the
direst stress”?
3. What lessons do we learn from such hazardous experiences when
we are face-to-face with death?
4. Why do you think people undertake such adventurous expeditions
in spite of the risks involved?
Thinking about language
1. We have come across words like ‘gale’ and ‘storm’ in the account.
Here are two more words for ‘storm’: typhoon, cyclone. How many
words does your language have for ‘storm’?
2019-20WE’RE NOT AFRAID TO DIE ...
19
2. Here are the terms for different kinds of vessels: yacht, boat, canoe,
ship, steamer, schooner. Think of similar terms in your language.
3. ‘Catamaran’ is a kind of a boat. Do you know which Indian
language this word is derived from? Check the dictionary.
4. Have you heard any boatmen’s songs? What kind of emotions
do these songs usually express?
Working with words
1. The following words used in the text as ship terminology are
also commonly used in another sense. In what contexts would
you use the other meaning?
knot
stern
boom
hatch
anchor
2. The following three compound words end in -ship. What does
each of them mean?
airship
flagship
lightship
3. The following are the meanings listed in the dictionary against
the phrase ‘take on’. In which meaning is it used in the third
paragraph of the account:
take on sth:to begin to have a particular quality or
appearance; to assume sth
take sb on:to employ sb; to engage sb
to accept sb as one’s opponent in a game,
contest or conflict
take sb/sth on:
to decide to do sth; to allow sth/sb to enter
e.g. a bus, plane or ship; to take sth/sb
on board
Things to do
1. Given on the next page is a picture of a yacht. Label the parts of
the yacht using the terms given in the box.
2019-2020
HORNBILL
bowcabinruddercockpit
sternboommainsailmast
2. Here is some information downloaded from the Internet on Ile
Amsterdam. You can view images of the isle if you go online.
LocationSouth Indian Ocean, between
southernmost parts of Australia and
South Africa
Latitude and longitude37 92 S, 77 67 E
SovereigntyFrance
Political status notesPart of French Southern and
Antarctic Lands
Population35
Census notesMeteorological station staff
Land area in square
kilometres86
3. Locate Ile Amsterdam on the world map.
2019-20WE’RE NOT AFRAID TO DIE ...
21
Notes
This is a first person account of an adventurous ordeal that a family
experiences.
Understanding the text
This section deals with factual and global comprehension. Practice is
given in describing and noticing text organisation.
Talking about the text
Peer interaction about subjective responses to the text; empathy with
and comment on universal experiences; and human behaviour related
to risk-taking and adventure.
Thinking about language
lVariety of terms for a particular item in different languages
lEnglish words derived from Indian languages
lLinking language to music (boatmen’s songs)
Working with words
l‘Ship’ terms as homonyms.
lCompound words with ‘-ship’ with different connotations
lPhrasal verbs
Things to do
l
l
Honing reference skills by finding facts from the Internet, the
encyclopedia, and maps
Exposure to various genres of fact presentation
2019-2022
HORNBILL
3. Discovering Tut: the Saga Continues
A. R. Williams
Notice these expressions in the text.
Infer their meaning from the context.
forensic reconstruction
scudded across
³ casket grey
³ resurrection
funerary treasures
circumvented
³ computed tomography
³ eerie detail
³³
³³
He was just a teenager when he
died. The last heir of a powerful
family that had ruled Egypt and its
empire for centuries, he was laid to
rest laden with gold and eventually
forgotten. Since the discovery of his
tomb in 1922, the modern world
has speculated about what
happened to him, with murder being
the most extreme possibility. Now,
leaving his tomb for the first time
in almost 80 years, Tut has
undergone a CT scan that offers
new clues about his life and death —
and provides precise data for an
accurate forensic reconstruction
of the boyish pharaoh.
2019-20DISCOVERING TUT: THE SAGA CONTINUES
23
AN angry wind stirred up ghostly dust devils as King Tut was taken
from his resting place in the ancient Egyptian cemetery known as
the Valley of the Kings*. Dark-bellied clouds had scudded across
the desert sky all day and now were veiling the stars in casket
grey. It was 6 p.m. on 5 January 2005. The world’s most famous
mummy glided head first into a CT scanner brought here to probe
the lingering medical mysteries of this little understood young ruler
who died more than 3,300 years ago.
All afternoon the usual line of tourists from around the world
had descended into the cramped, rock-cut tomb some 26 feet
underground to pay their respects. They gazed at the murals on the
walls of the burial chamber and peered at Tut’s gilded face, the most
striking feature of his mummy-shaped outer coffin lid. Some visitors
read from guidebooks in a whisper. Others stood silently, perhaps
pondering Tut’s untimely death in his late teens, or wondering with
a shiver if the pharaoh’s curse — death or misfortune falling upon
those who disturbed him — was really true.
“The mummy is in very bad condition because of what Carter
did in the 1920s,” said Zahi Hawass, Secretary General of Egypt’s
Supreme Council of Antiquities, as he leaned over the body for a
long first look. Carter— Howard Carter, that is — was the British
archaeologist who in 1922 discovered Tut’s tomb after years of
futile searching. Its contents, though hastily ransacked in antiquity,
were surprisingly complete. They remain the richest royal collection
ever found and have become part of the pharaoh’s legend. Stunning
artefacts in gold, their eternal brilliance meant to guarantee
resurrection, caused a sensation at the time of the discovery —
and still get the most attention. But Tut was also buried with
everyday things he’d want in the afterlife: board games, a bronze
razor, linen undergarments, cases of food and wine.
After months of carefully recording the pharaoh’s funerary
treasures, Carter began investigating his three nested coffins.
Opening the first, he found a shroud adorned with garlands of
willow and olive leaves, wild celery, lotus petals, and cornflowers,
the faded evidence of a burial in March or April. When he finally
reached the mummy, though, he ran into trouble. The ritual resins
had hardened, cementing Tut to the bottom of his solid gold coffin.
“No amount of legitimate force could move them,” Carter wrote
later. “What was to be done?”
The sun can beat down like a hammer this far south in Egypt,
and Carter tried to use it to loosen the resins. For several hours
* See map on next page
2019-2024
HORNBILL
EGYPT
ASIA
Nil e R i v
er
AFRICA
(map not to scale)
2019-20DISCOVERING TUT: THE SAGA CONTINUES
25
he set the mummy outside in blazing sunshine that heated it to
149 degrees Fahrenheit. Nothing budged. He reported with
scientific detachment that “the consolidated material had to be
chiselled away from beneath the limbs and trunk before it was
possible to raise the king’s remains.”
In his defence, Carter really had little choice. If he hadn’t cut
the mummy free, thieves most certainly would have
circumvented the guards and ripped it apart to remove the gold.
In Tut’s time the royals were fabulously wealthy, and they
thought — or hoped — they could take their riches with them.
For his journey to the great beyond, King Tut was lavished with
glittering goods: precious collars, inlaid necklaces and bracelets,
rings, amulets, a ceremonial apron, sandals, sheaths for his fingers
and toes, and the now iconic inner coffin and mask — all of pure
gold. To separate Tut from his adornments, Carter’s men removed
the mummy’s head and severed nearly every major joint. Once
they had finished, they reassembled the remains on a layer of
sand in a wooden box with padding that concealed the damage,
the bed where Tut now rests.
Archaeology has changed substantially in the intervening
decades, focusing less on treasure and more on the fascinating
details of life and intriguing mysteries of death. It also uses more
sophisticated tools, including medical technology. In 1968, more
than 40 years after Carter’s discovery, an anatomy professor
X-rayed the mummy and revealed a startling fact: beneath the resin
that cakes his chest, his breast-bone and front ribs are missing.
Today diagnostic imaging can be done with computed
tomography, or CT, by which hundreds of X-rays in cross section
are put together like slices of bread to create a three-dimensional
virtual body. What more would a CT scan reveal of Tut than the
X-ray? And could it answer two of the biggest questions still
lingering about him — how did he die, and how old was he at the
time of his death?
King Tut’s demise was a big event, even by royal standards.
He was the last of his family’s line, and his funeral was the death
rattle of a dynasty. But the particulars of his passing away and its
aftermath are unclear.
Amenhotep III — Tut’s father or grandfather — was a powerful
pharaoh who ruled for almost four decades at the height of the
eighteenth dynasty’s golden age. His son Amenhotep IV succeeded
him and initiated one of the strangest periods in the history of
2019-2026
HORNBILL
ancient Egypt. The new pharaoh promoted the worship of the
Aten, the sun disk, changed his name to Akhenaten, or ‘servant
of the Aten,’ and moved the religious capital from the old city of
Thebes to the new city of Akhetaten, known now as Amarna. He
further shocked the country by attacking Amun, a major god,
smashing his images and closing his temples. “It must have been
a horrific time,” said Ray Johnson, director of the University of
Chicago’s research centre in Luxor, the site of ancient Thebes.
“The family that had ruled for centuries was coming to an end,
and then Akhenaten went a little wacky.”
After Akhenaten’s death, a mysterious ruler named
Smenkhkare appeared briefly and exited with hardly a trace.
And then a very young Tutankhaten took the throne — King
Tut as he’s widely known today. The boy king soon changed his
name to Tutankhamun, ‘living image of Amun,’ and oversaw a
restoration of the old ways. He reigned for about nine years —
and then died unexpectedly.
Regardless of his fame and the speculations about his fate, Tut is
one mummy among many in Egypt. How many? No one knows. The
Egyptian Mummy Project, which began an inventory in late 2003,
has recorded almost 600 so far and is still counting. The next phase:
scanning the mummies with a portable CT machine donated by the
National Geographic Society and Siemens, its manufacturer. King Tut
is one of the first mummies to be scanned — in death, as in life, moving
regally ahead of his countrymen.
A CT machine scanned the mummy head to toe, creating
1,700 digital X-ray images in cross section. Tut’s head, scanned
in 0.62 millimetre slices to register its intricate structures, takes
on eerie detail in the resulting image. With Tut’s entire body
similarly recorded, a team of specialists in radiology, forensics,
and anatomy began to probe the secrets that the winged goddesses
of a gilded burial shrine protected for so long.
The night of the scan, workmen carried Tut from the tomb in
his box. Like pallbearers they climbed a ramp and a flight of
stairs into the swirling sand outside, then rose on a hydraulic
lift into the trailer that held the scanner. Twenty minutes later
two men emerged, sprinted for an office nearby, and returned
with a pair of white plastic fans. The million-dollar scanner had
quit because of sand in a cooler fan. “Curse of the pharaoh,”
joked a guard nervously.
2019-20DISCOVERING TUT: THE SAGA CONTINUES
27
Eventually the substitute fans worked well enough to finish
the procedure. After checking that no data had been lost, the
technicians turned Tut over to the workmen, who carried him
back to his tomb. Less than three hours after he was removed
from his coffin, the pharaoh again rested in peace where the
funerary priests had laid him so long ago.
Back in the trailer a technician pulled up astonishing images
of Tut on a computer screen. A grey head took shape from a
scattering of pixels, and the technician spun and tilted it in every
direction. Neck vertebrae appeared as clearly as in an anatomy
class. Other images revealed a hand, several views of the rib cage,
and a transection of the skull. But for now the pressure was off.
Sitting back in his chair, Zahi Hawass smiled, visibly relieved
that nothing had gone seriously wrong. “I didn’t sleep last night,
not for a second,” he said. “I was so worried. But now I think I
will go and sleep.”
Mural in King Tut’s tomb showing King
Tut with Osiris, the god of the afterlife
2019-2028
HORNBILL
By the time we left the trailer, descending metal stairs to the
sandy ground, the wind had stopped. The winter air lay cold and
still, like death itself, in this valley of the departed. Just above the
entrance to Tut’s tomb stood Orion — the constellation that the
ancient Egyptians knew as the soul of Osiris, the god of the
afterlife — watching over the boy king.
(Source: National Geographic, Vol 207, No. 6)
Understanding the text
1. Give reasons for the following.
(i) King Tut’s body has been subjected to repeated scrutiny.
(ii) Howard Carter’s investigation was resented.
(iii) Carter had to chisel away the solidified resins to raise the
king’s remains.
(iv) Tut’s body was buried along with gilded treasures.
(v) The boy king changed his name from Tutankhaten to
Tutankhamun.
2.
(i) List the deeds that led Ray Johnson to describe Akhenaten
as “wacky”.
(ii) What were the results of the CT scan?
(iii) List the advances in technology that have improved forensic
analysis.
(iv) Explain the statement, “King Tut is one of the first mummies
to be scanned — in death, as in life ...”
Talking about the text
Discuss the following in groups of two pairs, each pair in a group
taking opposite points of view.
1. Scientific intervention is necessary to unearth buried mysteries.
2. Advanced technology gives us conclusive evidence of past events.
3. Traditions, rituals and funerary practices must be respected.
4. Knowledge about the past is useful to complete our knowledge
of the world we live in.
2019-20DISCOVERING TUT: THE SAGA CONTINUES
29
Thinking about language
1. Read the following piece of information from The Encyclopedia of
Language by David Crystal.
Egyptian is now extinct: its history dates from before the third
millennium B.C., preserved in many hieroglyphic inscriptions
and papyrus manuscripts. Around the second century A.D.,
it developed into a language known as Coptic. Coptic may
still have been used as late as the early nineteenth century
and is still used as a religious language by Monophysite
Christians in Egypt.
2. What do you think are the reasons for the extinction of
languages?
3. Do you think it is important to preserve languages?
4. In what ways do you think we could help prevent the extinction
of languages and dialects?
Working with words
1. Given below are some interesting combinations of words. Explain
why they have been used together.
(i) ghostly dust devils
(vi) dark-bellied clouds
(ii) desert sky(vii) casket grey
(iii) stunning artefacts(viii) eternal brilliance
(iv) funerary treasures(ix) ritual resins
(v) scientific detachment(x) virtual body
2. Here are some commonly used medical terms. Find out their
meanings.
CT scanMRItomography
autopsydialysisECG
post mortemangiographybiopsy
Things to do
1. The constellation Orion is associated with the legend of Osiris,
the god of the afterlife.
2019-2030
HORNBILL
Find out the astronomical descriptions and legends associated
with the following.
(i) Ursa Major (Saptarishi mandala)
(ii) Polaris (Dhruva tara)
(iii) Pegasus (Winged horse)
(iv) Sirius (Dog star)
(v) Gemini (Mithuna)
2. Some of the leaves and flowers mentioned in the passage for
adorning the dead are willow, olive, celery, lotus, cornflower. Which
of these are common in our country?
3. Name some leaves and flowers that are used as adornments in
our country.
Notes
Understanding the text
Factual comprehension: giving reasons, listing
Talking about the text
Debate on issues raised in the text related to rediscovering history
with the help of technology; respect for traditions (reflection on issues)
Thinking about language
Extinction of language and language preservation
Working with words
Understanding adjectival collocations; common medical terms
Things to do
lRelating astronomical facts and legends (across the curriculum)
lFinding out botanical correlates
2019-20DISCOVERING TUT: THE SAGA CONTINUES
31
The Laburnum Top
Ted Hughes
The Laburnum top is silent, quite still
In the afternoon yellow September sunlight,
A few leaves yellowing, all its seeds fallen.
Till the goldfinch comes, with a twitching chirrup
A suddenness, a startlement, at a branch end.
Then sleek as a lizard, and alert, and abrupt,
She enters the thickness, and a machine starts up
Of chitterings, and a tremor of wings, and trillings —
The whole tree trembles and thrills.
It is the engine of her family.
She stokes it full, then flirts out to a branch-end
Showing her barred face identity mask
Then with eerie delicate whistle-chirrup whisperings
She launches away, towards the infinite
And the laburnum subsides to empty.
laburnum: a short tree with hanging branches, yellow
flowers and poisonous seeds
goldfinch: a small singing bird with yellow feathers on
its wings
2019-2032
HORNBILL
Find out
1. What laburnum is called in your language.
2. Which local bird is like the goldfinch.
Think it out
1. What do you notice about the beginning and the ending of the
poem?
2. To what is the bird’s movement compared? What is the basis for
the comparison?
3. Why is the image of the engine evoked by the poet?
4. What do you like most about the poem?
5. What does the phrase “her barred face identity mask” mean?
Note down
1. the sound words
2. the movement words
3. the dominant colour in the poem.
List the following
1. Words which describe ‘sleek’, ‘alert’ and ‘abrupt’.
2. Words with the sound ‘ch’ as in ‘chart’ and ‘tr’ as in ‘trembles’ in
the poem.
3. Other sounds that occur frequently in the poem.
Thinking about language
Look for some other poem on a bird or a tree in English or any other
language.
Try this out
Write four lines in verse form on any tree that you see around you.
2019-20T HE LABURNUM T OP
33
Notes
This poem has been placed after a text which has references to
names of plants for thematic sequencing.
Understanding the poem
lGlossing of ‘laburnum’ and ‘goldfinch’
lFactual understanding
lMovement of thought and structuring (poetic sensitivity)
lFocus on figures of speech and imagery used (poetic sensitivity)
lAttention to sounds, lexical collocations (poetic sensitivity)
Thinking about language
lFinding equivalents in other languages (multilingualism)
lRelating to thematically similar poems in other languages
(multilingualism)
lAttempt at creativity
2019-2034
HORNBILL
4. Landscape of the Soul
Nathalie Trouveroy
Notice these expressions in the text.
Infer their meaning from the context.
³anecdote³illusionistic likeness
³delicate realism³conceptual space
³figurative painting
A WONDERFUL old tale is told about the painter Wu Daozi, who
lived in the eighth century. His last painting was a landscape
commissioned by the Tang Emperor Xuanzong, to decorate a
palace wall. The master had hidden his work behind a screen, so
only the Emperor would see it. For a long while, the Emperor
admired the wonderful scene, discovering forests, high mountains,
waterfalls, clouds floating in an immense sky, men on hilly paths,
birds in flight. “Look, Sire”, said the painter, “in this cave, at the
foot of the mountain, dwells a spirit.” The painter clapped his
hands, and the entrance to the cave opened. “The inside is splendid,
beyond anything words can convey. Please let me show Your
Majesty the way.” The painter entered the cave; but the entrance
closed behind him, and before the astonished Emperor could move
or utter a word, the painting had vanished from the wall. Not a
trace of Wu Daozi’s brush was left — and the artist was never
seen again in this world.
Such stories played an important part in China’s classical
education. The books of Confucius and Zhuangzi are full of them;
they helped the master to guide his disciple in the right direction.
Beyond the anecdote, they are deeply revealing of the spirit in
2019-20LANDSCAPE OF THE SOUL
35
which art was considered. Contrast this story — or another famous
one about a painter who wouldn’t draw the eye of a dragon he
had painted, for fear it would fly out of the painting — with an old
story from my native Flanders that I find most representative of
Western painting.
In fifteenth century Antwerp, a master blacksmith called
Quinten Metsys fell in love with a painter’s daughter. The father
would not accept a son-in-law in such a profession. So Quinten
sneaked into the painter’s studio and painted a fly on his latest
panel, with such delicate realism that the master tried to swat
it away before he realised what had happened. Quinten was
immediately admitted as an apprentice into his studio. He married
his beloved and went on to become one of the most famous
painters of his age. These two stories illustrate what each form
of art is trying to achieve: a perfect, illusionistic likeness in
Europe, the essence of inner life and spirit in Asia.
In the Chinese story, the Emperor commissions a painting
and appreciates its outer appearance. But the artist reveals to
him the true meaning of his work. The Emperor may rule over
the territory he has conquered, but only the artist knows the
way within. “Let me show the Way”, the ‘Dao’, a word that means
both the path or the method, and the mysterious works of the
Universe. The painting is gone, but the artist has reached his goal —
beyond any material appearance.
A classical Chinese landscape is not meant to reproduce an
actual view, as would a Western figurative painting. Whereas
the European painter wants you to borrow his eyes and look at
a particular landscape exactly as he saw it, from a specific angle,
the Chinese painter does not choose a single viewpoint. His
landscape is not a ‘real’ one, and you can enter it from any point,
then travel in it; the artist creates a path for your eyes to travel
up and down, then back again, in a leisurely movement. This is
even more true in the case of the horizontal scroll, in which the
action of slowly opening one section of the painting, then rolling
it up to move on to the other, adds a dimension of time which is
unknown in any other form of painting. It also requires the active
participation of the viewer, who decides at what pace he will travel
through the painting — a participation which is physical as well
as mental. The Chinese painter does not want you to borrow his
eyes; he wants you to enter his mind. The landscape is an inner
one, a spiritual and conceptual space.
2019-2036
HORNBILL
This concept is expressed as shanshui, literally ‘mountain-
water’ which used together represent the word ‘landscape’. More
than two elements of an image, these represent two
complementary poles, reflecting the Daoist view of the universe.
The mountain is Yang — reaching vertically towards Heaven,
stable, warm, and dry in the sun, while the water is Yin — horizontal
and resting on the earth, fluid, moist and cool. The interaction of
Yin, the receptive, feminine aspect of universal energy, and its
counterpart Yang, active and masculine, is of course a
fundamental notion of Daoism. What is often overlooked is an
essential third element, the Middle Void where their interaction
takes place. This can be compared with the yogic practice of
pranayama; breathe in, retain, breathe out — the suspension of
breath is the Void where meditation occurs. The Middle Void is
essential — nothing can happen without it; hence the importance
of the white, unpainted space in Chinese landscape.
This is also where Man finds a fundamental role. In that space
between Heaven and Earth, he becomes the conduit of
communication between both poles of the Universe. His presence
is essential, even if it’s only suggested; far from being lost or
oppressed by the lofty peaks, he is, in Francois Cheng’s wonderful
expression, “the eye of the landscape”.
[excerpt from ‘Landscape of the Soul:
Ethics and Spirituality in Chinese
Painting’, slightly edited]
Getting Inside ‘Outsider Art’
When French painter Jean Dubuffet mooted the concept of
‘art brut’ in the 1940s, the art of the untrained visionary
was of minority interest. From its almost veiled beginnings,
‘outsider art’ has gradually become the fastest growing area
of interest in contemporary art internationally.
This genre is described as the art of those who have ‘no
right’ to be artists as they have received no formal training,
yet show talent and artistic insight. Their works are a
stimulating contrast to a lot of mainstream offerings.
Around the time Dubuffet was propounding his
concept, in India “an untutored genius was creating
paradise”. Years ago the little patch of jungle that he began
clearing to make himself a garden sculpted with stone and
2019-20LANDSCAPE OF THE SOUL
37
A Rock Garden sculpture made of broken bangles by Nek Chand
recycled material is known to the world today as the Rock
Garden, at Chandigarh.
Its 80-year-old creator– director, Nek Chand, is now hailed
as India’s biggest contributor to outsider art. The fiftieth issue
(Spring 2005) of Raw Vision, a UK-based magazine pioneer
in outsider art publications, features Nek Chand, and his
Rock Garden sculpture ‘Women by the Waterfall’ on its
anniversary issue’s cover.
The notion of ‘art brut’ or ‘raw art’, was of works that
were in their raw state as regards cultural and artistic
influences. Anything and everything from a tin to a sink to a
broken down car could be material for a work of art,
something Nek Chand has taken to dizzying heights.
Recognising his art as “an outstanding testimony of the
difference a single man can make when he lives his dream”,
the Swiss Commission for UNESCO will be honouring him
by way of a European exposition of his works. The five-month
interactive show, ‘Realm of Nek Chand’, beginning October
will be held at leading museums in Switzerland, Belgium,
France and Italy. “The biggest reward is walking through the
garden and seeing people enjoy my creation,” Nek Chand says.
BRINDA SURI
Hindustan Times, 28 August 2005
2019-2038
HORNBILL
Understanding the text
1.
2.
(i)Contrast the Chinese view of art with the European view
with examples.
(ii)Explain the concept of shanshui.
(i)What do you understand by the terms ‘outsider art’ and
‘art brut’ or ‘raw art’?
(ii)Who was the “untutored genius who created a paradise”
and what is the nature of his contribution to art?
Talking about the text
Discuss the following statements in groups of four.
1. “The Emperor may rule over the territory he has conquered, but
only the artist knows the way within.”
2. “The landscape is an inner one, a spiritual and conceptual space.”
Thinking about language
1. Find out the correlates of Yin and Yang in other cultures.
2. What is the language spoken in Flanders?
Working with words
I.
The following common words are used in more than one sense.
panelstudio
essencematerial
brush
Examine the following sets of sentences to find out what the
words, ‘panel’ and ‘essence’ mean in different contexts.
1.
(i)The masks from Bawa village in Mali look like long
panels of decorated wood.
(ii)Judge H. Hobart Grooms told the jury panel he had
heard the reports.
(iii)The panel is laying the groundwork for an international
treaty.
2019-20LANDSCAPE OF THE SOUL
2.
39
(iv)The glass panels of the window were broken.
(v)Through the many round tables, workshops and panel
discussions, a consensus was reached.
(vi)The sink in the hinged panel above the bunk drains
into the head.
(i)Their repetitive structure must have taught the people
around the great composer the essence of music.
(ii)Part of the answer is in the proposition; but the essence
is in the meaning.
(iii)The implications of these schools of thought are of
practical essence for the teacher.
(iv)They had added vanilla essence to the pudding.
II. Now find five sentences each for the rest of the words to show
the different senses in which each of them is used.
Noticing form
lA classical Chinese landscape is not meant to reproduce an actual
view, as would a Western figurative painting.
lWhereas the European painter wants you to borrow his eyes and
look at a particular landscape exactly as he saw it, from a specific
angle, the Chinese painter does not choose a single viewpoint.
The above two examples are ways in which contrast may be expressed.
Combine the following sets of ideas to show the contrast between them.
1.
2.
3.
(i)European art tries to achieve a perfect, illusionistic likeness.
(ii)Asian art tries to capture the essence of inner life and spirit.
(i)The Emperor commissions a painting and appreciates its
outer appearance.
(ii)The artist reveals to him the true meaning of his work.
(i)The Emperor may rule over the territory he has conquered.
(ii)The artist knows the way within.
Things to do
1.Find out about as many Indian schools of painting as you can.
Write a short note on the distinctive features of each school.
2.Find out about experiments in recycling that help in
environmental conservation.
2019-2040
HORNBILL
Notes
Understanding the text
Factual and global understanding
Talking about the text
Discussing spiritual experiences
Thinking about language
lInter-cultural philosophical viewpoints and related terms
lKnowing about the languages of the world
Working with words
Using words according to their function
Noticing form
Use of conjunctions to express contrast
Soaring Interest in Chinese Art
A painting by an 86-year old Chinese master has gone under
the hammer for a record 30 million yuan, highlighting soaring
world interest in Chinese art.
The work by Wu Guanzhong depicting a cluster of colourful
parrots sitting on tree branches smashed the previous record
price for a Chinese ink painting of 23 million yuan for a twelfth
century masterpiece by the Song Dynasty emperor, Huizong.
“Wu Guanzhong has successfully melded Chinese and Western
artistic traditions,” said Ma Zhefei, marketing manager from
China’s Poly Art and Culture Co.
2019-20LANDSCAPE OF THE SOUL
41
The Voice of the Rain
Walt Whitman
And who art thou? said I to the soft-falling shower,
Which, strange to tell, gave me an answer, as here translated:
I am the Poem of Earth, said the voice of the rain,
Eternal I rise impalpable out of the land and the
bottomless sea,
Upward to heaven, whence, vaguely form’d, altogether
changed, and yet the same,
I descend to lave the droughts, atomies, dust-layers of
the globe,
And all that in them without me were seeds only, latent,
unborn;
And forever, by day and night, I give back life to my
own origin,
And make pure and beautify it;
(For song, issuing from its birth-place, after fulfilment,
wandering
Reck’d or unreck’d, duly with love returns.)
impalpable: something that cannot be touched
lave: wash; bathe
atomies: tiny particles
latent: hidden
2019-2042
HORNBILL
Think it out
I.
1. There are two voices in the poem. Who do they belong to?
Which lines indicate this?
2. What does the phrase “strange to tell” mean?
3. There is a parallel drawn between rain and music. Which
words indicate this? Explain the similarity between the two.
4. How is the cyclic movement of rain brought out in the poem?
Compare it with what you have learnt in science.
5. Why are the last two lines put within brackets?
6. List the pairs of opposites found in the poem.
II. Notice the following sentence patterns.
1. And who art thou? said I to the soft-falling shower.
2. I am the Poem of Earth, said the voice of the rain.
3. Eternal I rise
4. For song … duly with love returns
Rewrite the above sentences in prose.
III. Look for some more poems on the rain and see how this one is
different from them.
Notes
This is a nature poem celebrating the coming of the rain.
Understanding the poem
lVoices in the poem
lSense of the poem
lRelating to the process of rainfall scientifically (across the
curriculum)
lNoticing sentence structure in poems
lComparison with other rain poems
2019-20THE AILING PLANET: THE GREEN MOVEMENT’S ROLE
43
5. The Ailing Planet: the Green
Movement’s Role
Nani Palkhivala
Notice these expressions in the text.
Infer their meaning from the context.
³a holistic and ecological view³inter alia
³sustainable development³decimated
³languish³catastrophic depletion
³ignominious darkness³transcending concern
The following article was written by Nani Palkhivala and
published in The Indian Express on 24 November 1994. The
issues that he raised regarding the declining health of the earth
continue to have relevance.
ONE cannot recall any movement in world history which has
gripped the imagination of the entire human race so completely
and so rapidly as the Green Movement which started nearly
twenty-five years ago. In 1972 the world’s first nationwide Green
party was founded in New Zealand. Since then, the movement
has not looked back.
We have shifted — one hopes, irrevocably — from the
mechanistic view to a holistic and ecological view of the world.
It is a shift in human perceptions as revolutionary as that
2019-2044
HORNBILL
introduced by Copernicus who taught mankind in the sixteenth
century that the earth and the other planets revolved round the
sun. For the first time in human history, there is a growing
worldwide consciousness that the earth itself is a living
organism — an enormous being of which we are parts. It has its
own metabolic needs and vital processes which need to be
respected and preserved.
The earth’s vital signs reveal a patient in declining health.
We have begun to realise our ethical obligations to be good
stewards of the planet and responsible trustees of the legacy to
future generations.
The concept of sustainable development was popularised
in 1987 by the World Commission on Environment and
Development. In its report it defined the idea as “Development
that meets the needs of the present, without compromising the
ability of future generations to meet their needs”, i.e., without
stripping the natural world of resources future generations
would need.
In the zoo at Lusaka, Zambia, there is a cage where the notice
reads, ‘The world’s most dangerous animal’. Inside the cage there
is no animal but a mirror where you see yourself. Thanks to the
efforts of a number of agencies in different countries, a new
awareness has now dawned upon the most dangerous animal in
the world. He has realised the wisdom of shifting from a system
based on domination to one based on partnership.
Scientists have catalogued about 1.4 million living species
with which mankind shares the earth. Estimates vary widely as
regards the still-uncatalogued living species — biologists reckon
that about three to a hundred million other living species still
languish unnamed in ignominious darkness.
One of the early international commissions which dealt, inter
alia, with the question of ecology and environment was the Brandt
Commission which had a distinguished Indian as one of its
members — Mr L.K. Jha. The First Brandt Report raised the
question — “Are we to leave our successors a scorched planet of
advancing deserts, impoverished landscapes and ailing
environment?”
Mr Lester R. Brown in his thoughtful book, The Global
Economic Prospect, points out that the earth’s principal
biological systems are four — fisheries, forests, grasslands, and
croplands — and they form the foundation of the global
2019-20THE AILING PLANET: THE GREEN MOVEMENT’S ROLE
45
economic system. In addition to supplying our food, these four
systems provide virtually all the raw materials for industry
except minerals and petroleum-derived synthetics. In large
areas of the world, human claims on these systems are reaching
an unsustainable level, a point where their productivity is being
impaired. When this happens, fisheries collapse, forests
disappear, grasslands are converted into barren wastelands,
and croplands deteriorate. In a protein-conscious and protein-
hungry world, over-fishing is common every day. In poor
countries, local forests are being decimated in order to procure
firewood for cooking. In some places, firewood has become so
expensive that “what goes under the pot now costs more than
what goes inside it”. Since the tropical forest is, in the words of
Dr Myers, “the powerhouse of evolution”, several species of life
face extinction as a result of its destruction.
It has been well said that forests precede mankind; deserts
follow. The world’s ancient patrimony of tropical forests is now
eroding at the rate of forty to fifty million acres a year, and the
growing use of dung for burning deprives the soil of an important
natural fertiliser. The World Bank estimates that a five-fold increase
in the rate of forest planting is needed to cope with the expected
fuelwood demand in the year 2000.
James Speth, the President of the World Resources
Institute, said the other day, “We were saying that we are losing
the forests at an acre a second, but it is much closer to an
acre-and-a-half to a second”.
Article 48A of the Constitution of India provides that “the
State shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment
and to safeguard the forests and wildlife of the country”. But what
causes endless anguish is the fact that laws are never respected
nor enforced in India. (For instance, the Constitution says that
casteism, untouchability and bonded labour shall be abolished,
but they flourish shamelessly even after forty-four years of the
operation of the Constitution.) A recent report of our Parliament’s
Estimates Committee has highlighted the near catastrophic
depletion of India’s forests over the last four decades. India,
according to reliable data, is losing its forests at the rate of 3.7
million acres a year. Large areas, officially designated as forest
land, “are already virtually treeless”. The actual loss of forests is
estimated to be about eight times the rate indicated by
government statistics.
2019-2046
HORNBILL
A three-year study using satellites and aerial photography
conducted by the United Nations, warns that the environment
has deteriorated so badly that it is ‘critical’ in many of the eighty-
eight countries investigated.
There can be no doubt that the growth of world population
is one of the strongest factors distorting the future of human
society. It took mankind more than a million years to reach the
first billion. That was the world population around the year 1800.
By the year 1900, a second billion was added, and the twentieth
century has added another 3.7 billion. The present world
population is estimated at 5.7 billion. Every four days the world
population increases by one million.
Fertility falls as incomes rise, education spreads, and health
improves. Thus development is the best contraceptive. But
development itself may not be possible if the present increase in
numbers continues.
The rich get richer, and the poor beget children which
condemns them to remain poor. More children does not mean
more workers, merely more people without work. It is not
suggested that human beings be treated like cattle and
compulsorily sterilised. But there is no alternative to voluntary
family planning without introducing an element of coercion.
The choice is really between control of population and
perpetuation of poverty.
The population of India is estimated to be 920 million
today — more than the entire populations of Africa and South
America put together. No one familiar with the conditions in
India would doubt that the hope of the people would die in
their hungry hutments unless population control is given
topmost priority.
For the first time in human history we see a transcending
concern — the survival not just of the people but of the planet.
We have begun to take a holistic view of the very basis of our
existence. The environmental problem does not necessarily signal
our demise, it is our passport for the future. The emerging new
world vision has ushered in the Era of Responsibility. It is a holistic
view, an ecological view, seeing the world as an integrated whole
rather than a dissociated collection of parts.
Industry has a most crucial role to play in this new Era of
Responsibility. What a transformation would be effected if more
2019-20THE AILING PLANET: THE GREEN MOVEMENT’S ROLE
47
businessmen shared the view of the Chairman of Du Pont,
Mr Edgar S. Woolard who, five years ago, declared himself to be
the Company’s “Chief Environmental Officer”. He said, “Our
continued existence as a leading manufacturer requires that we
excel in environmental performance.”
Of all the statements made by Margaret Thatcher during the
years of her Prime Ministership, none has passed so decisively
into the current coin of English usage as her felicitous words: “No
generation has a freehold on this earth. All we have is a life tenancy
— with a full repairing lease”. In the words of Mr Lester Brown,
“We have not inherited this earth from our forefathers; we have
borrowed it from our children.”
Understanding the text
1. Locate the lines in the text that support the title ‘The Ailing
Planet’.
2. What does the notice ‘The world’s most dangerous animal’ at a
cage in the zoo at Lusaka, Zambia, signify?
3. How are the earth’s principal biological systems being depleted?
4. Why does the author aver that the growth of world population is
one of the strongest factors distorting the future of human society?
Talking about the text
Discuss in groups of four.
1. Laws are never respected nor enforced in India.
2. “Are we to leave our successors a scorched planet of advancing
deserts, impoverished landscapes and an ailing environment?”
3. “We have not inherited this earth from our forefathers; we have
borrowed it from our children”.
4. The problems of overpopulation that directly affect our
everyday life.
2019-2048
HORNBILL
Thinking about language
The phrase ‘inter alia’ meaning ‘among other things’ is one of the
many Latin expressions commonly used in English.
Find out what these Latin phrases mean.
1. prima facie
2. ad hoc
3. in camera
4. ad infinitum
5. mutatis mutandis
6. caveat
7. tabula rasa
Working with words
I.
Locate the following phrases in the text and study their
connotation.
1. gripped the imagination of
2. dawned upon
3. ushered in
4. passed into current coin
5. passport of the future
II. The words ‘grip’, ‘dawn’, ‘usher’, ‘coin’, ‘passport’ have a literal
as well as a figurative meaning. Write pairs of sentences using
each word in the literal as well as the figurative sense.
Things to do
1. Make posters to highlight the importance of the Green Movement.
2. Maintain a record of the trees cut down and the parks
demolished in your area, or any other act that violates the
environment. Write to newspapers reporting on any such acts
that disturb you.
2019-20THE AILING PLANET: THE GREEN MOVEMENT’S ROLE
Notes
Understanding the text
lEnvironmental issues
lSocial issues
Talking about the text
lContemporary issues
lEnvisioning the future
Thinking about language
Latin expressions commonly used
Working with words
lConnotations
lFinding literal and figurative meanings
Things to do
Making children aware of their reponsibilities towards the
environment
2019-20
4950
HORNBILL
6. The Browning Version
Terence Rattigan
Notice these expressions in the text.
Infer their meaning from the context.
³remove³
³slackers³ got carried away
kept in
³muck³
³sadist
³shrivelled up
cut
This is an excerpt from The Browning Version*. The scene is set
in a school. Frank is young and Crocker-Harris, middle-aged. Both
are masters. Taplow is a boy of sixteen who has come in to do
extra work for Crocker-Harris. But the latter has not yet arrived,
and Frank finds Taplow waiting.
FRANK:Do I know you?
TAPLOW:No, sir.
FRANK:What’s your name?
TAPLOW:Taplow.
FRANK:Taplow! No, I don’t. You’re not a scientist I gather?
TAPLOW:No, sir, I’m still in the lower fifth. I can’t specialise
until next term — that’s to say, if I’ve got my
remove all right.
FRANK:Don’t you know if you’ve got your remove?
TAPLOW:No sir, Mr Crocker-Harris doesn’t tell us the results
like the other masters.
* The reference within the play of Robert Browning’s translation of the Greek
tragedy, Agamemnon
2019-20THE BROWNING VERSION
51
FRANK:Why not?
TAPLOW:Well, you know what he’s like, sir.
FRANK:I believe there is a rule that form results should
only be announced by the headmaster on the last
day of term.
TAPLOW:Yes — but who else pays attention to it — except
Mr Crocker-Harris?
FRANK:I don’t, I admit — but that’s no criterion. So you’ve
got to wait until tomorrow to know your fate, have
you?
TAPLOW:Yes, sir.
FRANK:Supposing the answer is favourable — what then?
TAPLOW:Oh — science, sir, of course.
FRANK:(sadly) Yes. We get all the slackers.
TAPLOW:(protestingly) I’m extremely interested in science, sir.
FRANK:Are you? I’m not. Not, at least, in the science I
have to teach.
TAPLOW:Well, anyway, sir, it’s a good deal more exciting
than this muck (indicating his book).
FRANK:What is this muck?
TAPLOW:Aeschylus, sir. The Agamemnon.
FRANK:And your considered view is that the Agamemnon
is muck?
TAPLOW:Well, no, sir. I don’t think the play is muck —
exactly. I suppose, in a way, it’s rather a good
plot, really, a wife murdering her husband and all
that. I only meant the way it’s taught to us — just
a lot of Greek words strung together and fifty lines
if you get them wrong.
FRANK:You sound a little bitter, Taplow.
TAPLOW:I am rather, sir.
FRANK:Kept in, eh?
TAPLOW:No, sir. Extra work.
FRANK:Extra work — on the last day of school?
2019-2052
HORNBILL
T APLOW : Yes, sir, and I might be playing golf. You’d think
he’d have enough to do anyway himself,
considering he’s leaving tomorrow for good —
but oh no, I missed a day last week when I
was ill — so here I am — and look at the
weather, sir.
FRANK:Bad luck. Still there’s one comfort. You’re pretty
well certain to get your remove tomorrow for being
a good boy in taking extra work.
TAPLOW:Well, I’m not so sure, sir. That would be true of
the ordinary masters, all right. They just wouldn’t
dare not to give a chap a remove after his taking
extra work. But those sort of rules don’t apply to
the Crock — Mr Crocker-Harris. I asked him
yesterday outright if he’d given me a remove and
do you know what he said, sir?
FRANK:No. What?
TAPLOW:(imitating a very gentle, rather throaty voice) “My
dear Taplow, I have given you exactly what you
deserve. No less; and certainly no more.” Do you
know sir, I think he may have marked me down,
rather than up, for taking extra work. I mean, the
man’s hardly human. (He breaks off quickly.)
Sorry, sir. Have I gone too far?
FRANK:Yes. Much too far.
TAPLOW:Sorry, sir. I got carried away.
FRANK:Evidently. (He picks up a newspaper and opens it) —
Er Taplow.
TAPLOW:Yes, sir?
FRANK:What was that Crocker-Harris said to you? Just —
er — repeat it, would you?
TAPLOW:(imitating again) “My dear Taplow, I have given
you exactly what you deserve. No less; and
certainly no more.”
FRANK:(looking severe) Not in the least like him. Read
your nice Aeschylus and be quiet.
TAPLOW:(with dislike) Aeschylus.
2019-20THE BROWNING VERSION
53
FRANK:Look, what time did Mr Crocker-Harris tell you to
be here?
TAPLOW:Six-thirty, sir.
FRANK:Well, he’s ten minutes late. Why don’t you cut?
You could still play golf before lock-up.
TAPLOW:(really shocked) Oh, no, I couldn’t cut. Cut the
Crock — Mr Crocker-Harris? I shouldn’t think it’s
ever been done in the whole time he’s been here.
God knows what would happen if I did. He’d
probably follow me home, or something ...
FRANK:I must admit I envy him the effect he seems to
have on you boys in the form. You all seem scared
to death of him. What does he do — beat you all,
or something?
TAPLOW:Good Lord, no. He’s not a sadist, like one or two
of the others.
FRANK:I beg your pardon?
TAPLOW:A sadist, sir, is someone who gets pleasure out of
giving pain.
FRANK:Indeed? But I think you went on to say that some
other masters ...
T APLOW: Well, of course, they are, sir. I won’t mention
names, but you know them as well as I do. Of
course I know most masters think we boys don’t
understand a thing — but, sir, you’re different.
You’re young — well, comparatively, anyway —
and you’re science. You must know what
sadism is.
FRANK:(after a pause) Good Lord! What are our schools
coming to?
TAPLOW:Anyway, the Crock isn’t a sadist. That’s what I’m
saying. He wouldn’t be so frightening if he were —
because at least it would show he had some
feelings. But he hasn’t. He’s all shrivelled up
inside like a nut and he seems to hate people to
like him. It’s funny, that. I don’t know any other
master who doesn’t like being liked —
2019-2054
HORNBILL
FRANK:And I don’t know any boy who doesn’t use that for
his own purposes.
TAPLOW:Well, it’s natural sir. But not with the Crock —
FRANK:Mr Crocker-Harris.
TAPLOW:Mr Crocker-Harris. The funny thing is that in spite
of everything, I do rather like him. I can’t help it.
And sometimes I think he sees it and that seems
to shrivel him up even more —
FRANK:I’m sure you’re exaggerating.
TAPLOW: No, sir. I’m not. In form the other day he made
one of his classical jokes. Of course nobody
laughed because nobody understood it, myself
included. Still, I knew he’d meant it as funny, so
I laughed. Out of ordinary common politeness,
and feeling a bit sorry for him for having made a
poor joke. Now I can’t remember what the joke
was, but suppose I make it. Now you laugh, sir.
(Frank laughs.)
TAPLOW:
(in a gentle, throaty voice) “Taplow — you laughed
at my little joke, I noticed. I must confess that I
am pleased at the advance your Latin has made
since you so readily have understood what the
rest of the form did not. Perhaps, now, you would
be good enough to explain it to them, so that they
too can share your pleasure”.
The door up right is pushed open and Millie Crocker-Harris
enters. She is a thin woman in her late thirties, rather more
smartly dressed than the general run of schoolmasters’
wives. She is wearing a cape and carries a shopping
basket. She closes the door and then stands by the screen
watching Taplow and Frank. It is a few seconds before
they notice her.
FRANK:
Come along, Taplow (moves slowly above the
desk). Do not be so selfish as to keep a good joke
to yourself. Tell the others… (He breaks off
suddenly, noticing Millie.) Oh Lord!
2019-20THE BROWNING VERSION
55
Frank turns quickly, and
seeing Millie.
seems infinitely relieved at
FRANK:Oh, hullo.
MILLIE:(without expression) Hullo. (She comes down to the
sideboard and puts her basket on it.)
TAPLOW:(moving up to left of Frank; whispering frantically)
Do you think she heard?
FRANK:TAPLOW:(shakes his head comfortingly. Millie takes off her
cape and hangs it on the hall-stand.) I think she did.
She was standing there quite a time.
If she did and she tells him, there goes my remove.
FRANK:Nonsense. (He crosses to the fireplace.)
Millie takes the basket from the sideboard, moves above
the table and puts the basket on it.
MILLIE:(to Taplow) Waiting for my husband?
TAPLOW:(moving down left of the table) Er-yes.
MILLIE:He’s at the Bursar’s and might be there quite a
time. If I were you I’d go.
TAPLOW:(doubtfully) He said most particularly I was to
come.
MILLIE:Well, why don’t you run away for a quarter of an
hour and come back? (She unpacks some things
from the basket.)
TAPLOW:Supposing he gets here before me?
MILLIE:(smiling) I’ll take the blame. (She takes a prescription
out of the basket.) I tell you what — you can do a job
for him. Take this prescription to the chemist and
get it made up.
All right, Mrs Crocker-Harris. (He crosses towards
the door up right.)
TAPLOW:
2019-2056
HORNBILL
Understanding the text
1. Comment on the attitude shown by Taplow towards Crocker-Harris.
2. Does Frank seem to encourage Taplow’s comments on Crocker-
Harris?
3. What do you gather about Crocker-Harris from the play?
Talking about the text
Discuss with your partners
1. Talking about teachers among friends.
2. The manner you adopt when you talk about a teacher to other
teachers.
3. Reading plays is more interesting than studying science.
Working with words
A sadist is a person who gets pleasure out of giving pain to others.
Given below are some dictionary definitions of certain kinds of persons.
Find out the words that fit these descriptions.
1. A person who considers it very important that things should be
correct or genuine e.g. in the use of language or in the arts: P...
2. A person who believes that war and violence are wrong and will not
fight in a war: P...
3. A person who believes that nothing really exists: N...
4. A person who is always hopeful and expects the best in all things: O...
5. A person who follows generally accepted norms of behaviour: C...
6. A person who believes that material possessions are all that matter
in life: M...
Things to do
Based on the text enact your own version of the play. Work in pairs.
2019-20THE BROWNING VERSION
57
Notes
After the students have read the play silently by themselves, ask them to
take on the roles of the three characters and read their parts aloud.
Understanding the text
Global comprehension
Talking about the text
lSpeaking to each other about something that most students do:
commenting on their teachers (To teachers — take this in a spirit
of good humour)
lReflecting on how we talk about others in their absence
lScience and Literature: the dichotomy
Working with words
Common terms used for people with particular behaviour patterns or
beliefs, taking off from the text with the word ‘sadist’.
Things to do
Instead of conventional role-play involving reading out or enacting the
original text, students are encouraged to make their own versions of
the play based on the same content (creativity, fun and authenticity).
2019-2058
HORNBILL
Childhood
Markus Natten
When did my childhood go?
Was it the day I ceased to be eleven,
Was it the time I realised that Hell and Heaven,
Could not be found in Geography,
And therefore could not be,
Was that the day!
When did my childhood go?
Was it the time I realised that adults were not
all they seemed to be,
They talked of love and preached of love,
But did not act so lovingly,
Was that the day!
When did my childhood go?
Was it when I found my mind was really mine,
To use whichever way I choose,
Producing thoughts that were not those of other people
But my own, and mine alone
Was that the day!
Where did my childhood go?
It went to some forgotten place,
That’s hidden in an infant’s face,
That’s all I know.
2019-20CHILDHOOD
59
Think it out
1. Identify the stanza that talks of each of the following.
individuality
rationalism
hypocrisy
2. What according to the poem is involved in the process of
growing up?
3. What is the poet’s feeling towards childhood?
4. Which do you think are the most poetic lines? Why?
Notes
Understanding the poem
Questions are based on
lThematic comprehension
lReflection on theme
lPoetic sensibility
2019-2060
HORNBILL
7. The Adventure
Jayant Narlikar
Notice these expressions in the text.
Infer their meaning from the context.
blow-by-blow account
morale booster
³ relegated to
³ political acumen
de facto
astute
³ doctored accounts
³ gave vent to
³³
³³
THE Jijamata Express sped along the Pune-Bombay* route
considerably faster than the Deccan Queen. There were no
industrial townships outside Pune. The first stop, Lonavala, came
in 40 minutes. The ghat section that followed was no different
from what he knew. The train stopped at Karjat only briefly and
went on at even greater speed. It roared through Kalyan.
Meanwhile, the racing mind of Professor Gaitonde had arrived
at a plan of action in Bombay. Indeed, as a historian he felt he
should have thought of it sooner. He would go to a big library
and browse through history books. That was the surest way of
finding out how the present state of affairs was reached. He also
planned eventually to return to Pune and have a long talk with
Rajendra Deshpande, who would surely help him understand
what had happened.
That is, assuming that in this world there existed someone
called Rajendra Deshpande!
The train stopped beyond the long tunnel. It was a small station
called Sarhad. An Anglo-Indian in uniform went through the train
checking permits.
The present story is an adapted version. The original text of the story can be
consulted on the NCERT website : www.ncert.nic.in
* Now known as Mumbai
2019-20THE ADVENTURE
61
“This is where the British Raj begins. You are going for the
first time, I presume?” Khan Sahib asked.
“Yes.” The reply was factually correct. Gangadharpant had
not been to this Bombay before. He ventured a question: “And,
Khan Sahib, how will you go to Peshawar?”
“This train goes to the Victoria Terminus*. I will take the
Frontier Mail tonight out of Central.”
“How far does it go? By what route?”
“Bombay to Delhi, then to Lahore and then Peshawar. A long
journey. I will reach Peshawar the day after tomorrow.”
Thereafter, Khan Sahib spoke a lot about his business and
Gangadharpant was a willing listener. For, in that way, he was
able to get some flavour of life in this India that was so different.
The train now passed through the suburban rail traffic. The
blue carriages carried the letters, GBMR, on the side.
“Greater Bombay Metropolitan Railway,” explained Khan
Sahib. “See the tiny Union Jack painted on each carriage? A
gentle reminder that we are in British territory.”
The train began to slow down beyond Dadar and stopped
only at its destination, Victoria Terminus. The station looked
remarkably neat and clean. The staff was mostly made up of
Anglo-Indians and Parsees along with a handful of British officers.
As he emerged from the station, Gangadharpant found
himself facing an imposing building. The letters on it proclaimed
its identity to those who did not know this Bombay landmark:
EAST INDIA HOUSE HEADQUARTERS OF
THE EAST INDIA COMPANY
Prepared as he was for many shocks, Professor Gaitonde had not
expected this. The East India Company had been wound up shortly
after the events of 1857 — at least, that is what history books said.
Yet, here it was, not only alive but flourishing. So, history had
taken a different turn, perhaps before 1857. How and when had it
happened? He had to find out.
As he walked along Hornby Road, as it was called, he found
a different set of shops and office buildings. There was no
Handloom House building. Instead, there were Boots and
Woolworth departmental stores, imposing offices of Lloyds,
Barclays and other British banks, as in a typical high street of a
town in England.
* Now known as Chattrapati Shivaji Terminus
2019-2062
HORNBILL
He turned right along Home Street and entered Forbes
building.
“I wish to meet Mr Vinay Gaitonde, please,” he said to the
English receptionist.
She searched through the telephone list, the staff list and
then through the directory of employees of all the branches of
the firm. She shook her head and said, “I am afraid I can’t find
anyone of that name either here or in any of our branches. Are
you sure he works here?”
This was a blow, not totally unexpected. If he himself were
dead in this world, what guarantee had he that his son would
be alive? Indeed, he may not even have been born!
He thanked the girl politely and came out. It was
characteristic of him not to worry about where he would stay.
His main concern was to make his way to the library of the
Asiatic Society to solve the riddle of history. Grabbing a quick
lunch at a restaurant, he made his way to the Town Hall.
_____________
Yes, to his relief, the Town Hall was there, and it did house the
library. He entered the reading room and asked for a list of history
books including his own.
His five volumes duly arrived on his table. He started from
the beginning. Volume one took the history up to the period of
Ashoka, volume two up to Samudragupta, volume three up to
Mohammad Ghori and volume four up to the death of Aurangzeb.
Up to this period history was as he knew it. The change evidently
had occurred in the last volume.
Reading volume five from both ends inwards, Gangadharpant
finally converged on the precise moment where history had taken
a different turn.
That page in the book described the Battle of Panipat, and it
mentioned that the Marathas won it handsomely. Abdali was
routed and he was chased back to Kabul by the triumphant
Maratha army led by Sadashivrao Bhau and his nephew, the
young Vishwasrao.
The book did not go into a blow-by-blow account of the
battle itself. Rather, it elaborated in detail its consequences for
the power struggle in India. Gangadharpant read through the
account avidly. The style of writing was unmistakably his, yet
he was reading the account for the first time!
2019-20THE ADVENTURE
63
Their victory in the battle was not only a great morale booster
to the Marathas but it also established their supremacy in
northern India. The East India Company, which had been
watching these developments from the sidelines, got the message
and temporarily shelved its expansionist programme.
For the Peshwas the immediate result was an increase in
the influence of Bhausaheb and Vishwasrao who eventfully
succeeded his father in 1780 A.D. The trouble-maker,
Dadasaheb, was relegated to the background and he eventually
retired from state politics.
To its dismay, the East India Company met its match in
the new Maratha ruler, Vishwasrao. He and his brother,
Madhavrao, combined political acumen with valour and
systematically expanded their influence all over India. The
Company was reduced to pockets of influence near Bombay,
Calcutta* and Madras@, just like its European rivals, the
Portuguese and the French.
For political reasons, the Peshwas kept the puppet Mughal
regime alive in Delhi. In the nineteenth century these de facto
rulers from Pune were astute enough to recognise the
importance of the technological age dawning in Europe. They
set up their own centres for science and technology. Here, the
East India Company saw another opportunity to extend its
influence. It offered aid and experts. They were accepted only to
make the local centres self-sufficient.
The twentieth century brought about further changes
inspired by the West. India moved towards a democracy. By
then, the Peshwas had lost their enterprise and they were
gradually replaced by democratically elected bodies. The
Sultanate at Delhi survived even this transition, largely because
it wielded no real influence. The Shahenshah of Delhi was no
more than a figurehead to rubber-stamp the ‘recommendations’
made by the central parliament.
As he read on, Gangadharpant began to appreciate the India
he had seen. It was a country that had not been subjected to
slavery for the white man; it had learnt to stand on its feet and
knew what self-respect was. From a position of strength and for
purely commercial reasons, it had allowed the British to retain
* Now known as Kolkata
@ Now known as Chennai
2019-2064
HORNBILL
Bombay as the sole outpost on the subcontinent. That lease was
to expire in the year 2001, according to a treaty of 1908.
Gangadharpant could not help comparing the country he
knew with what he was witnessing around him.
But, at the same time, he felt that his investigations were
incomplete. How did the Marathas win the battle? To find the
answer he must look for accounts of the battle itself.
He went through the books and journals before him. At last,
among the books he found one that gave him the clue. It was
Bhausahebanchi Bakhar.
Although he seldom relied on the Bakhars for historical
evidence, he found them entertaining to read. Sometimes, buried
in the graphic but doctored accounts, he could spot the germ
of truth. He found one now in a three-line account of how close
Vishwasrao had come to being killed:
... And then Vishwasrao guided his horse to the melee where the
elite troops were fighting and he attacked them. And God was
merciful. A shot brushed past his ear. Even the difference of a til
(sesame) would have led to his death.
At eight o’clock the librarian politely reminded the professor
that the library was closing for the day. Gangadharpant emerged
from his thoughts. Looking around he noticed that he was the
only reader left in that magnificent hall.
“I beg your pardon, sir! May I request you to keep these
books here for my use tomorrow morning? By the way, when do
you open?”
“At eight o’clock, sir.” The librarian smiled. Here was a user
and researcher right after his heart.
As the professor left the table he shoved some notes into his
right pocket. Absent-mindedly, he also shoved the Bakhar into
his left pocket.
__________
He found a guest house to stay in and had a frugal meal. He
then set out for a stroll towards the Azad Maidan.
In the maidan he found a throng moving towards a pandal.
So, a lecture was to take place. Force of habit took Professor
Gaitonde towards the pandal. The lecture was in progress,
although people kept coming and going. But Professor Gaitonde
was not looking at the audience. He was staring at the platform
2019-20THE ADVENTURE
65
as if mesmerised. There was a table and a chair but the latter was
unoccupied.
The presidential chair unoccupied! The sight stirred him to
the depths. Like a piece of iron attracted to a magnet, he swiftly
moved towards the chair.
The speaker stopped in mid-sentence, too shocked to
continue. But the audience soon found voice.
“Vacate the chair!”
“This lecture series has no chairperson...”
“Away from the platform, mister!”
“The chair is symbolic, don’t you know?”
What nonsense! Whoever heard of a public lecture without a
presiding dignitary? Professor Gaitonde went to the mike and
gave vent to his views. “Ladies and gentlemen, an unchaired
lecture is like Shakespeare’s Hamlet without the Prince of
Denmark. Let me tell you...”
But the audience was in no mood to listen. “Tell us nothing.
We are sick of remarks from the chair, of vote of thanks, of long
introductions.”
“We only want to listen to the speaker...”
“We abolished the old customs long ago...”
“Keep the platform empty, please...”
But Gangadharpant had the experience of speaking at 999
meetings and had faced the Pune audience at its most hostile.
He kept on talking.
He soon became a target for a shower of tomatoes, eggs and
other objects. But he kept on trying valiantly to correct this
sacrilege. Finally, the audience swarmed to the stage to eject
him bodily.
And, in the crowd Gangadharpant was nowhere to be seen.
__________
“That is all I have to tell, Rajendra. All I know is that I was found
in the Azad Maidan in the morning. But I was back in the world
I am familiar with. Now, where exactly did I spend those two
days when I was absent from here?”
Rajendra was dumbfounded by the narrative. It took him a
while to reply.
“Professor, before, just prior to your collision with the truck,
what were you doing?” Rajendra asked.
2019-2066
HORNBILL
“I was thinking of the catastrophe theory and its implications
for history.”
“Right! I thought so!” Rajendra smiled.
“Don’t smile smugly. In case you think that it was just my
mind playing tricks and my imagination running amok, look
at this.”
And, triumphantly, Professor Gaitonde produced his vital
piece of evidence: a page torn out of a book.
Rajendra read the text on the printed page and his face
underwent a change. Gone was the smile and in its place came
a grave expression. He was visibly moved.
Gangadharpant pressed home his advantage. “I had
inadvertently slipped the Bakhar in my pocket as I left the library.
I discovered my error when I was paying for my meal. I had
intended to return it the next morning. But it seems that in the
melee of Azad Maidan, the book was lost; only this torn-off page
remained. And, luckily for me, the page contains vital evidence.”
Rajendra again read the page. It described how Vishwasrao
narrowly missed the bullet; and how that event, taken as an
omen by the Maratha army, turned the tide in their favour.
“Now look at this.” Gangadharpant produced his own copy
of Bhausahebanchi Bakhar, opened at the relevant page. The
account ran thus:
... And then Vishwasrao guided his horse to the melee where the
elite troops were fighting, and he attacked them. And God expressed
His displeasure. He was hit by the bullet.
“Professor Gaitonde, you have given me food for thought.
Until I saw this material evidence, I had simply put your
experience down to fantasy. But facts can be stranger than
fantasies, as I am beginning to realise.”
“Facts? What are the facts? I am dying to know!” Professor
Gaitonde said.
____________
Rajendra motioned him to silence and started pacing the room,
obviously under great mental strain. Finally, he turned around
and said, “Professor Gaitonde, I will try to rationalise your
experience on the basis of two scientific theories as known today.
Whether I succeed or not in convincing you of the facts, only
you can judge — for you have indeed passed through a fantastic
experience: or, more correctly, a catastrophic experience!”
2019-20THE ADVENTURE
67
“Please continue, Rajendra! I am all ears,” Professor Gaitonde
replied. Rajendra continued pacing as he talked.
“You have heard a lot about the catastrophe theory at that
seminar. Let us apply it to the Battle of Panipat. Wars fought
face to face on open grounds offer excellent examples of this
theory. The Maratha army was facing Abdali’s troops on the
field of Panipat. There was no great disparity between the latter’s
troops and the opposing forces. Their armour was comparable.
So, a lot depended on the leadership and the morale of the troops.
The juncture at which Vishwasrao, the son of and heir to the
Peshwa, was killed proved to be the turning point. As history
has it, his uncle, Bhausaheb, rushed into the melee and was
never seen again. Whether he was killed in battle or survived is
not known. But for the troops at that particular moment, that
blow of losing their leaders was crucial. They lost their morale
and fighting spirit. There followed an utter rout.
“Exactly, Professor! And what you have shown me on that
torn page is the course taken by the battle, when the bullet
missed Vishwasrao. A crucial event gone the other way. And its
effect on the troops was also the opposite. It boosted their morale
and provided just that extra impetus that made all the
difference,” Rajendra said.
“Maybe so. Similar statements are made about the Battle of
Waterloo, which Napoleon could have won. But we live in a
unique world which has a unique history. This idea of ‘it might
have been’ is okay for the sake of speculation but not for reality,”
Gangadharpant said.
“I take issue with you there. In fact, that brings me to my
second point which you may find strange; but please hear me
out,” Rajendra said.
Gangadharpant listened expectantly as Rajendra continued.
“What do we mean by reality? We experience it directly with our
senses or indirectly via instruments. But is it limited to what we
see? Does it have other manifestations?
“That reality may not be unique has been found from
experiments on very small systems — of atoms and their
constituent particles. When dealing with such systems the
physicist discovered something startling. The behaviour of these
systems cannot be predicted definitively even if all the physical
laws governing those systems are known.
“Take an example. I fire an electron from a source. Where
will it go? If I fire a bullet from a gun in a given direction at a
2019-2068
HORNBILL
given speed, I know where it will be at a later time. But I cannot
make such an assertion for the electron. It may be here, there,
anywhere. I can at best quote odds for it being found in a specified
location at a specified time.”
“The lack of determinism in quantum theory! Even an
ignoramus historian like me has heard of it,” Professor
Gaitonde said.
“So, imagine many world pictures. In one world the electron
is found here, in another it is over there. In yet another it is in a
still different location. Once the observer finds where it is, we
know which world we are talking about. But all those alternative
worlds could exist just the same.” Rajendra paused to marshall
his thoughts.
“But is there any contact between those many worlds?”
Professor Gaitonde asked.
“Yes and no! Imagine two worlds, for example. In both an
electron is orbiting the nucleus of an atom...”
“Like planets around the sun...” Gangadharpant interjected.
“Not quite. We know the precise trajectory of the planet. The
electron could be orbiting in any of a large number of specified
states. These states may be used to identify the world. In state
no.1 we have the electron in a state of higher energy. In state
no. 2 it is in a state of lower energy. It can make a jump from
high to low energy and send out a pulse of radiation. Or a pulse
of radiation can knock it out of state no. 2 into state no.1. Such
transitions are common in microscopic systems. What if it
happened on a macroscopic level?” Rajendra said.
“I get you! You are suggesting that I made a transition from
one world to another and back again?” Gangadharpant asked.
“Fantastic though it seems, this is the only explanation I
can offer. My theory is that catastrophic situations offer radically
different alternatives for the world to proceed. It seems that so
far as reality is concerned all alternatives are viable but the
observer can experience only one of them at a time.
“By making a transition, you were able to experience two worlds
although one at a time. The one you live in now and the one where
you spent two days. One has the history we know, the other a
different history. The separation or bifurcation took place in the
Battle of Panipat. You neither travelled to the past nor to the future.
You were in the present but experiencing a different world. Of
course, by the same token there must be many more different
worlds arising out of bifurcations at different points of time.”
2019-20THE ADVENTURE
69
As Rajendra concluded, Gangadharpant asked the question
that was beginning to bother him most. “But why did I make the
transition?”
“If I knew the answer I would solve a great problem.
Unfortunately, there are many unsolved questions in science
and this is one of them. But that does not stop me from guessing.”
Rajendra smiled and proceeded, “You need some interaction to
cause a transition. Perhaps, at the time of the collision you were
thinking about the catastrophe theory and its role in wars. Maybe
you were wondering about the Battle of Panipat. Perhaps, the
neurons in your brain acted as a trigger.”
“A good guess. I was indeed wondering what course history
would have taken if the result of the battle had gone the other
way,” Professor Gaitonde said. “That was going to be the topic of
my thousandth presidential address.”
“Now you are in the happy position of recounting your real
life experience rather than just speculating,” Rajendra laughed.
But Gangadharpant was grave.
“No, Rajendra, my thousandth address was made on the Azad
Maidan when I was so rudely interrupted. No. The Professor
Gaitonde who disappeared while defending his chair on the platform
will now never be seen presiding at another meeting — I have
conveyed my regrets to the organisers of the Panipat seminar.”
Understanding the text
I.
Tick the statements that are true.
1. The story is an account of real events.
2. The story hinges on a particular historical event.
3. Rajendra Deshpande was a historian.
4. The places mentioned in the story are all imaginary.
5. The story tries to relate history to science.
II. Briefly explain the following statements from the text.
1. “You neither travelled to the past nor the future. You were in
the present experiencing a different world.”
2. “You have passed through a fantastic experience: or more
correctly, a catastrophic experience.”
3. Gangadharpant could not help comparing the country he knew
with what he was witnessing around him.
2019-2070
HORNBILL
4. “The lack of determinism in quantum theory!”
5. “You need some interaction to cause a transition.”
Talking about the text
1. Discuss the following statements in groups of two pairs, each pair
in a group taking opposite points of view.
(i) A single event may change the course of the history of a nation.
(ii) Reality is what is directly experienced through the senses.
(iii) The methods of inquiry of history, science and philosophy
are similar.
2.
(i) The story is called ‘The Adventure’. Compare it with the
adventure described in ‘We’re Not Afraid to Die...’
(ii) Why do you think Professor Gaitonde decided never to preside
over meetings again?
Thinking about language
1. In which language do you think Gangadharpant and Khan Sahib
talked to each other? Which language did Gangadharpant use to
talk to the English receptionist?
2. In which language do you think Bhausahebanchi Bakhar was
written?
3. There is mention of three communities in the story: the Marathas,
the Mughals, the Anglo-Indians. Which language do you think
they used within their communities and while speaking to the
other groups?
4. Do you think that the ruled always adopt the language of the ruler?
Working with words
I.
Tick the item that is closest in meaning to the following phrases.
1. to take issue with
(i)to accept
(ii)to discuss
(iii)to disagree
(iv)to add
2019-20THE ADVENTURE
71
2. to give vent to
(i)to express
(ii)to emphasise
(iii)suppress
(iv)dismiss
3. to stand on one’s feet
(i)to be physically strong
(ii)to be independent
(iii)to stand erect
(iv)to be successful
4. to be wound up
(i)to become active
(ii)to stop operating
(iii)to be transformed
(iv)to be destroyed
5. to meet one’s match
(i)to meet a partner who has similar tastes
(ii)to meet an opponent
(iii)to meet someone who is equally able as oneself
(iv)to meet defeat
II. Distinguish between the following pairs of sentences.
1. (i)
He was visibly moved.
(ii) He was visually impaired.
2. (i)
Green and black stripes were used alternately.
(ii) Green stripes could be used or alternatively black ones.
3. (i)
The team played the two matches successfully.
(ii) The team played two matches successively.
4. (i)
The librarian spoke respectfully to the learned scholar.
(ii) You will find the historian and the scientist in the
archaeology and natural science sections of the
museum respectively.
2019-2072
HORNBILL
Noticing form
The story deals with unreal and hypothetical conditions. Some of
the sentences used to express this notion are given below:
1. If I fire a bullet from a gun in a given direction at a given speed,
I know where it will be at a later time.
2. If I knew the answer I would solve a great problem.
3. If he himself were dead in this world, what guarantee had he
that his son would be alive.
4. What course would history have taken if the battle had gone the
other way?
Notice that in an unreal condition, it is clearly expected that the
condition will not be fulfilled.
Things to do
I.
Read the following passage on the Catastrophe Theory downloaded
from the Internet.
Originated by the French mathematician, Rene Thom, in
the 1960s, catastrophe theory is a special branch of
dynamical systems theory. It studies and classifies
phenomena characterised by sudden shifts in behaviour
arising from small changes in circumstances.
Catastrophes are bifurcations between different
equilibria, or fixed point attractors. Due to their restricted
nature, catastrophes can be classified on the basis of how
many control parameters are being simultaneously varied.
For example, if there are two controls, then one finds the
most common type, called a ‘cusp’ catastrophe. If, however,
there are more than five controls, there is no classification.
Catastrophe theory has been applied to a number of
different phenomena, such as the stability of ships at sea
and their capsizing, bridge collapse, and, with some less
convincing success, the fight-or-flight behaviour of animals
and prison riots.
2019-20THE ADVENTURE
73
II. Look up the Internet or an encyclopedia for information on the
following theories.
(i) Quantum theory
(ii) Theory of relativity
(iii) Big Bang theory
(iv) Theory of evolution
Notes
Understanding the text
lTrue/false items to check inferential comprehension
lExplaining statements from the text
Talking about the text
l
l
Discussing approaches of various disciplines to knowledge inquiry
(across the curriculum)
Cross-text reference
Thinking about language
lInter-community communication through common languages
lReference to languages of different disciplines
lPolitical domination and language imposition (discuss)
Working with words
l
l
Idiomatic expressions
Distinction between frequently misused word forms: respectively/
respectfully
Noticing form
Conditional sentences for unreal and hypothetical conditions
Things to do
Finding out about popular scientific theories (real-life reading)
2019-2074
HORNBILL
8. Silk Road
Nick Middleton
Notice these expressions in the text.
Infer their meaning from the context.
³ducking back³swathe³careered down
³manoeuvres³cairn of rocks³salt flats
³billowed
A FLAWLESS half-moon floated in a perfect blue sky on the morning
we said our goodbyes. Extended banks of cloud like long French
loaves glowed pink as the sun emerged to splash the distant
mountain tops with a rose-tinted blush. Now that we were leaving
Ravu, Lhamo said she wanted to give me a farewell present.
One evening I’d told her through Daniel that I was heading towards
Mount Kailash to complete the kora, and she’d said that I ought
to get some warmer clothes. After ducking back into her tent,
she emerged carrying one of the long-sleeved sheepskin coats
that all the men wore. Tsetan sized me up as we clambered into
his car. “Ah, yes,” he declared, “drokba, sir.”
We took a short cut to get off the Changtang. Tsetan knew a
route that would take us south-west, almost directly towards
Mount Kailash. It involved crossing several fairly high mountain
passes, he said. “But no problem, sir”, he assured us, “if there
is no snow.” What was the likelihood of that I asked. “Not
knowing, sir, until we get there.”
From the gently rolling hills of Ravu, the short cut took us
across vast open plains with nothing in them except a few gazelles
2019-20SILK ROAD
75
Sketch of Mount Kailash
that would look up from nibbling the arid pastures and frown
before bounding away into the void. Further on, where the plains
became more stony than grassy, a great herd of wild ass came
into view. Tsetan told us we were approaching them long before
they appeared. “Kyang,” he said, pointing towards a far-off pall
of dust. When we drew near, I could see the herd galloping en
masse, wheeling and turning in tight formation as if they were
practising manoeuvres on some predetermined course. Plumes
of dust billowed into the crisp, clean air.
As hills started to push up once more from the rocky
wilderness, we passed solitary drokbas tending their flocks.
Sometimes men, sometimes women, these well-wrapped figures
would pause and stare at our car, occasionally waving as we
passed. When the track took us close to their animals, the sheep
would take evasive action, veering away from the speeding vehicle.
We passed nomads’ dark tents pitched in splendid isolation,
usually with a huge black dog, a Tibetan mastiff, standing guard.
These beasts would cock their great big heads when they became
aware of our approach and fix us in their sights. As we continued
to draw closer, they would explode into action, speeding directly
towards us, like a bullet from a gun and nearly as fast.
These shaggy monsters, blacker than the darkest night,
usually wore bright red collars and barked furiously with massive
jaws. They were completely fearless of our vehicle, shooting
straight into our path, causing Tsetan to brake and swerve. The
2019-2076
HORNBILL
dog would make chase for a hundred metres or so before easing
off, having seen us off the property. It wasn’t difficult to
understand why ferocious Tibetan mastiffs became popular in
China’s imperial courts as hunting dogs, brought along the Silk
Road in ancient times as tribute from Tibet.
By now we could see snow-capped mountains gathering on
the horizon. We entered a valley where the river was wide and
mostly clogged with ice, brilliant white and glinting in the
sunshine. The trail hugged its bank, twisting with the meanders
as we gradually gained height and the valley sides closed in.
The turns became sharper and the ride bumpier, Tsetan
now in third gear as we continued to climb. The track moved
away from the icy river, labouring through steeper slopes that
sported big rocks daubed with patches of bright orange lichen.
Beneath the rocks, hunks of snow clung on in the near-
permanent shade. I felt the pressure building up in my ears,
held my nose, snorted and cleared them. We struggled round
another tight bend and Tsetan stopped. He had opened his
door and jumped out of his seat before I realised what was
going on. “Snow,” said Daniel as he too exited the vehicle, letting
in a breath of cold air as he did so.
A swathe of the white stuff lay across the track in front of
us, stretching for maybe fifteen metres before it petered out and
the dirt trail reappeared. The snow continued on either side of
us, smoothing the abrupt bank on the upslope side. The bank
was too steep for our vehicle to scale, so there was no way round
the snow patch. I joined Daniel as Tsetan stepped on to the
encrusted snow and began to slither and slide forward, stamping
his foot from time to time to ascertain how sturdy it was. I looked
at my wristwatch. We were at 5,210 metres above sea level.
The snow didn’t look too deep to me, but the danger wasn’t
its depth, Daniel said, so much as its icy top layer. “If we slip off,
the car could turn over,” he suggested, as we saw Tsetan grab
handfuls of dirt and fling them across the frozen surface. We
both pitched in and, when the snow was spread with soil, Daniel
and I stayed out of the vehicle to lighten Tsetan’s load. He backed
up and drove towards the dirty snow, eased the car on to its icy
surface and slowly drove its length without apparent difficulty.
Ten minutes later, we stopped at another blockage. “Not good,
sir,” Tsetan announced as he jumped out again to survey the
scene. This time he decided to try and drive round the snow.
2019-20SILK ROAD
77
The slope was steep and studded with major rocks, but somehow
Tsetan negotiated them, his four-wheel drive vehicle lurching
from one obstacle to the next. In so doing he cut off one of the
hairpin bends, regaining the trail further up where the snow
had not drifted.
I checked my watch again as we continued to climb in the
bright sunshine. We crept past 5,400 metres and my head began
to throb horribly. I took gulps from my water bottle, which is
supposed to help a rapid ascent.
We finally reached the top of the pass at 5,515 metres. It was
marked by a large cairn of rocks festooned with white silk scarves
and ragged prayer flags. We all took a turn round the cairn, in a
clockwise direction as is the tradition, and Tsetan checked the
tyres on his vehicle. He stopped at the petrol tank and partially
unscrewed the top, which emitted a loud hiss. The lower
atmospheric pressure was allowing the fuel to expand. It sounded
dangerous to me. “Maybe, sir,” Tsetan laughed “but no smoking.”
My headache soon cleared as we careered down the other
side of the pass. It was two o’clock by the time we stopped for
lunch. We ate hot noodles inside a long canvas tent, part of a
workcamp erected beside a dry salt lake. The plateau is
pockmarked with salt flats and brackish lakes, vestiges of the
Tethys Ocean which bordered Tibet before the great continental
collision that lifted it skyward. This one was a hive of activity,
men with pickaxes and shovels trudging back and forth in their
long sheepskin coats and salt-encrusted boots. All wore
sunglasses against the glare as a steady stream of blue trucks
emerged from the blindingly white lake laden with piles of salt.
By late afternoon we had reached the small town of Hor,
back on the main east-west highway that followed the old trade
route from Lhasa to Kashmir. Daniel, who was returning to
Lhasa, found a ride in a truck so Tsetan and I bade him farewell
outside a tyre-repair shop. We had suffered two punctures in
quick succession on the drive down from the salt lake and Tsetan
was eager to have them fixed since they left him with no spares.
Besides, the second tyre he’d changed had been replaced by
one that was as smooth as my bald head.
Hor was a grim, miserable place. There was no vegetation
whatsoever, just dust and rocks, liberally scattered with years
of accumulated refuse, which was unfortunate given that the
town sat on the shore of Lake Manasarovar, Tibet’s most
2019-2078
HORNBILL
venerated stretch of water. Ancient Hindu and Buddhist
cosmology pinpoints Manasarovar as the source of four great
Indian rivers: the Indus, the Ganges, the Sutlej and the
Brahmaputra. Actually only the Sutlej flows from the lake, but
the headwaters of the others all rise nearby on the flanks of
Mount Kailash. We were within striking distance of the great
mountain and I was eager to forge ahead.
But I had to wait. Tsetan told me to go and drink some tea in
Hor’s only cafe which, like all the other buildings in town, was
constructed from badly painted concrete and had three broken
windows. The good view of the lake through one of them helped
to compensate for the draught.
I was served by a Chinese youth in military uniform who
spread the grease around on my table with a filthy rag before
bringing me a glass and a thermos of tea.
Half an hour later, Tsetan relieved me from my solitary
confinement and we drove past a lot more rocks and rubbish
westwards out of town towards Mount Kailash.
My experience in Hor came as a stark contrast to accounts
I’d read of earlier travellers’ first encounters with Lake
Manasarovar. Ekai Kawaguchi, a Japanese monk who had
arrived there in 1900, was so moved by the sanctity of the lake
that he burst into tears. A couple of years later, the hallowed
waters had a similar effect on Sven Hedin, a Swede who wasn’t
prone to sentimental outbursts.
It was dark by the time we finally left again and after
10.30 p.m. we drew up outside a guest house in Darchen for
what turned out to be another troubled night. Kicking around
in the open-air rubbish dump that passed for the town of Hor
had set off my cold once more, though if truth be told it had
never quite disappeared with my herbal tea. One of my nostrils
was blocked again and as I lay down to sleep, I wasn’t convinced
that the other would provide me with sufficient oxygen. My
watch told me I was at 4,760 metres. It wasn’t much higher
than Ravu, and there I’d been gasping for oxygen several times
every night. I’d grown accustomed to these nocturnal
disturbances by now, but they still scared me.
Tired and hungry, I started breathing through my mouth.
After a while, I switched to single-nostril power which seemed
to be admitting enough oxygen but, just as I was drifting off,
I woke up abruptly. Something was wrong. My chest felt
2019-20SILK ROAD
79
strangely heavy and I sat up, a movement that cleared my nasal
passages almost instantly and relieved the feeling in my chest.
Curious, I thought.
I lay back down and tried again. Same result. I was on the
point of disappearing into the land of nod when something told
me not to. It must have been those emergency electrical
impulses again, but this was not the same as on previous
occasions. This time, I wasn’t gasping for breath, I was simply
not allowed to go to sleep.
Sitting up once more immediately made me feel better. I
could breathe freely and my chest felt fine. But as soon as I lay
down, my sinuses filled and my chest was odd. I tried propping
myself upright against the wall, but now I couldn’t manage to
relax enough to drop off. I couldn’t put my finger on the reason,
but I was afraid to go to sleep. A little voice inside me was
saying that if I did I might never wake up again. So I stayed
awake all night.
Tsetan took me to the Darchen medical college the following
morning. The medical college at Darchen was new and looked
like a monastery from the outside with a very solid door that led
into a large courtyard. We found the consulting room which was
dark and cold and occupied by a Tibetan doctor who wore none
of the paraphernalia that I’d been expecting. No white coat, he
looked like any other Tibetan with a thick pullover and a woolly
hat. When I explained my sleepless symptoms and my sudden
aversion to lying down, he shot me a few questions while feeling
the veins in my wrist.
“It’s a cold,” he said finally through Tsetan. “A cold and the
effects of altitude. I’ll give you something for it.”
I asked him if he thought I’d recover enough to be able to do
the kora. “Oh yes,” he said, “you’ll be fine.”
I walked out of the medical college clutching a brown envelope
stuffed with fifteen screws of paper. I had a five-day course of
Tibetan medicine which I started right away. I opened an after-
breakfast package and found it contained a brown powder that
I had to take with hot water. It tasted just like cinnamon. The
contents of the lunchtime and bedtime packages were less
obviously identifiable. Both contained small, spherical brown
pellets. They looked suspiciously like sheep dung, but of course
I took them. That night, after my first full day’s course, I slept
very soundly. Like a log, not a dead man.
2019-2080
HORNBILL
Once he saw that I was going to live Tsetan left me, to return
to Lhasa. As a Buddhist, he told me, he knew that it didn’t
really matter if I passed away, but he thought it would be bad
for business.
Darchen didn’t look so horrible after a good night’s sleep. It
was still dusty, partially derelict and punctuated by heaps of rubble
and refuse, but the sun shone brilliantly in a clear blue sky and
the outlook across the plain to the south gave me a vision of the
Himalayas, commanded by a huge, snow-capped mountain, Gurla
Mandhata, with just a wisp of cloud suspended over its summit.
The town had a couple of rudimentary general stores selling
Chinese cigarettes, soap and other basic provisions, as well as
the usual strings of prayer flags. In front of one, men gathered
in the afternoon for a game of pool, the battered table looking
supremely incongruous in the open air, while nearby women
washed their long hair in the icy water of a narrow brook that
babbled down past my guest house. Darchen felt relaxed and
unhurried but, for me, it came with a significant drawback. There
were no pilgrims.
I’d been told that at the height of the pilgrimage season, the
town was bustling with visitors. Many brought their own
accommodation, enlarging the settlement round its edges as
they set up their tents which spilled down on to the plain. I’d
timed my arrival for the beginning of the season, but it seemed
I was too early.
One afternoon I sat pondering my options over a glass of tea
in Darchen’s only cafe. After a little consideration, I concluded
they were severely limited. Clearly I hadn’t made much progress
with my self-help programme on positive thinking.
In my defence, it hadn’t been easy with all my sleeping
difficulties, but however I looked at it, I could only wait. The
pilgrimage trail was well-trodden, but I didn’t fancy doing it alone.
The kora was seasonal because parts of the route were liable to
blockage by snow. I had no idea whether or not the snow had
cleared, but I wasn’t encouraged by the chunks of dirty ice that
still clung to the banks of Darchen’s brook. Since Tsetan had
left, I hadn’t come across anyone in Darchen with enough English
to answer even this most basic question.
Until, that is, I met Norbu. The cafe was small, dark and
cavernous, with a long metal stove that ran down the middle.
The walls and ceiling were wreathed in sheets of multi-coloured
2019-20SILK ROAD
81
plastic, of the striped variety— broad blue, red and white—that is
made into stout, voluminous shopping bags sold all over China,
and in many other countries of Asia as well as Europe. As such,
plastic must rate as one of China’s most successful exports along
the Silk Road today.
The cafe had a single window beside which I’d taken up
position so that I could see the pages of my notebook. I’d also
brought a novel with me to help pass the time.
Norbu saw my book when he came in and asked with a
gesture if he could sit opposite me at my rickety table. “You
English?” he enquired, after he’d ordered tea. I told him I was,
and we struck up a conversation.
I didn’t think he was from those parts because he was wearing
a windcheater and metal-rimmed spectacles of a Western style.
He was Tibetan, he told me, but worked in Beijing at the Chinese
Academy of Social Sciences, in the Institute of Ethnic Literature.
I assumed he was on some sort of fieldwork.
“Yes and no,” he said. “I have come to do the kora.” My heart
jumped. Norbu had been writing academic papers about the
Kailash kora and its importance in various works of Buddhist
literature for many years, he told me, but he had never actually
done it himself.
When the time came for me to tell him what brought me to
Darchen, his eyes lit up. “We could be a team,” he said excitedly.
“Two academics who have escaped from the library.” Perhaps
my positive-thinking strategy was working after all.
My initial relief at meeting Norbu, who was also staying in
the guest house, was tempered by the realisation that he was
almost as ill-equipped as I was for the pilgrimage. He kept telling
me how fat he was and how hard it was going to be. “Very high
up,” he kept reminding me, “so tiresome to walk.” He wasn’t
really a practising Buddhist, it transpired, but he had
enthusiasm and he was, of course, Tibetan.
Although I’d originally envisaged making the trek in the
company of devout believers, on reflection I decided that perhaps
Norbu would turn out to be the ideal companion. He suggested
we hire some yaks to carry our luggage, which I interpreted as a
good sign, and he had no intention of prostrating himself all
round the mountain. “Not possible,” he cried, collapsing across
the table in hysterical laughter. It wasn’t his style, and anyway
his tummy was too big.
2019-2082
HORNBILL
Understanding the text
I.
Give reasons for the following statements.
1. The article has been titled ‘Silk Road.’
2. Tibetan mastiffs were popular in China’s imperial courts.
3. The author’s experience at Hor was in stark contrast to earlier
accounts of the place.
4. The author was disappointed with Darchen.
5. The author thought that his positive thinking strategy worked
well after all.
II. Briefly comment on
1. The purpose of the author’s journey to Mount Kailash.
2. The author’s physical condition in Darchen.
3. The author’s meeting with Norbu.
4. Tsetan’s support to the author during the journey.
5. “As a Buddhist, he told me, he knew that it didn’t really matter
if I passed away, but he thought it would be bad for business.”
Talking about the text
Discuss in groups of four
1. The sensitive behaviour of hill-folk.
2. The reasons why people willingly undergo the travails of difficult
journeys.
3. The accounts of exotic places in legends and the reality.
Thinking about language
1. Notice the kind of English Tsetan uses while talking to the author.
How do you think he picked it up?
2. What do the following utterances indicate?
(i) “I told her, through Daniel …”
(ii) “It’s a cold,” he said finally through Tsetan.
2019-20SILK ROAD
83
3. Guess the meaning of the following words.
kora
drokba
kyang
In which language are these words found?
Working with words
1. The narrative has many phrases to describe the scenic beauty
of the mountainside like:
A flawless half-moon floated in a perfect blue sky.
Scan the text to locate other such picturesque phrases.
2. Explain the use of the adjectives in the following phrases.
(i) shaggy monsters
(ii) brackish lakes
(iii) rickety table
(iv) hairpin bend
(v) rudimentary general stores
Noticing form
1. The account has only a few passive voice sentences. Locate them.
In what way does the use of active voice contribute to the style of
the narrative.
2. Notice this construction: Tsetan was eager to have them fixed. Write
five sentences with a similar structure.
Things to do
“The plateau is pockmarked with salt flats and brackish lakes, vestiges
of the Tethys Ocean which bordered Tibet before the continental collision
that lifted it skyward.”
Given below is an extract from an account of the Tethys Ocean
downloaded from the Internet. Go online, key in Tethys Ocean in Google
search and you will find exhaustive information on this geological event.
You can also consult an encyclopedia.
Today, India, Indonesia and the Indian Ocean cover the area
once occupied by the Tethys Ocean. Turkey, Iraq, and Tibet sit
on the land once known as Cimmeria. Most of the floor of the
Tethys Ocean disappeared under Cimmeria and Laurasia. We
2019-2084
HORNBILL
only know that Tethys existed because geologists like Suess
have found fossils of ocean creatures in rocks in the Himalayas.
So, we know those rocks were underwater, before the Indian
continental shelf began pushing upward as it smashed into
Cimmeria. We can see similar geologic evidence in Europe, where
the movement of Africa raised the Alps.
Notes
A travelogue presenting a panoramic view of Mt Kailash.
Understanding the text
lFactual comprehension
lAuthor’s adventurous experiences while scaling the hilly terrain
Talking about the text
lLifestyle of hill-folk
lAuthor’s description of exotic places
Thinking about language
lEnglish spoken by guides
lCommunicating with strangers
lGuessing the meanings of words from other languages from
the context
Working with words
lNoticing picturesque phrases
lUse of uncommon adjectives
Noticing form
Predominant use of active voice as a contributor to the style of narration
Things to do
Getting information about geological formations from the Internet/
encyclopedia
2019-20SILK ROAD
85
Father to Son
Elizabeth Jennings
I do not understand this child
Though we have lived together now
In the same house for years. I know
Nothing of him, so try to build
Up a relationship from how
He was when small. Yet have I killed
The seed I spent or sown it where
The land is his and none of mine?
We speak like strangers, there’s no sign
Of understanding in the air.
This child is built to my design
Yet what he loves I cannot share.
Silence surrounds us. I would have
Him prodigal, returning to
His father’s house, the home he knew,
Rather than see him make and move
His world. I would forgive him too,
Shaping from sorrow a new love.
Father and son, we both must live
On the same globe and the same land,
He speaks: I cannot understand
Myself, why anger grows from grief.
We each put out an empty hand,
Longing for something to forgive.
2019-2086
HORNBILL
Think it out
1. Does the poem talk of an exclusively personal experience or is it
fairly universal?
2. How is the father’s helplessness brought out in the poem?
3. Identify the phrases and lines that indicate distance between father
and son.
4. Does the poem have a consistent rhyme scheme?
Notes
The poem is autobiographical in nature and describes the relationship
between a father and his son.
Understanding the poem
Questions are based on
lthe universality of the experience described
lphrases in the poem
lrhyme scheme in the poem
2019-20NOTE-MAKING
87
Note-making
Summarising
Sub-titling
Essay-writing
Letter-writing
Creative Writing
2019-2088
HORNBILL
I know what I want to say, but I don’t know
how to say it.
– a student
To be able to write effectively the student needs to
³
³
³
³
understand the significance and purpose of writing
develop coherence in writing
understand and employ cohesive devices
have relative command of grammar, spelling and
punctuation.
2019-20NOTE-MAKING
89
1. Note-making
NOTE-MAKING is an important study skill. It also helps us at work.
We need to draw the main points of the material we read as it is
difficult to remember large chunks of information. Let us begin
with an example.
Study the following passage carefully
Pheasants are shy, charming birds known for their brilliant
plumage. These beautiful birds occupy an important niche
in nature’s scheme of things. Of the 900 bird species and
155 families, the pheasants belong to the order Galliformes
and family Phasinidae. The Galliformes are known as game
birds and this includes, pheasants, partridges, quails,
grouse, francolins, turkeys and megapodes.
There are 51 species of pheasants in the world and these
are shown in the identification chart brought out by the
Environment Society of India (ESI). The purpose of this chart
is to create awareness among members of the school eco-
clubs under the National Green Corps (NGC) of the Ministry
of Environment and Forests, Government of India.
Except for the Congo Peafowl, all the other pheasants
are from Asia. Scientists believe that all pheasants originated
from the Himalayas, and then scattered into Tibet, China,
Myanmar, South and South East Asian countries as well as
the Caucasus Mountains. The jungle fowl and the peafowl
spread to South India and Sri Lanka long before the early
settlers established themselves in the Indo-Gangetic plain.
About a third of all the pheasants in the world are found
in India. The male blue peafowl (the peacock) is the best
known member of the pheasant family and is India’s national
bird. It occupies a prominent place in India’s art, culture
and folklore.
2019-2090
HORNBILL
STEP 1
Notice that the important information has been underlined.
Pheasants are shy, charming birds known for their brilliant
plumage. These beautiful birds occupy an important niche
in nature’s scheme of things. Of the 900 bird species and
155 families, the pheasants belong to the order Galliformes
and family Phasinidae. The Galliformes are known as game
birds and this includes, pheasants, partridges, quails, grouse,
francolins, turkeys and megapodes.
There are 51 species of pheasants in the world and these
are shown in the identification chart brought out by the
Environment Society of India (ESI). The purpose of this chart
is to create awareness among members of the school eco-
clubs under the National Green Corps (NGC) of the Ministry
of Environment and Forests, Government of India.
Except for the Congo Peafowl, all the other pheasants
are from Asia. Scientists believe that all pheasants originated
from the Himalayas, and then scattered into Tibet, China,
Myanmar, South and South East Asian countries as well as
the Caucasus Mountains. The jungle fowl and the peafowl
spread to South India and Sri Lanka long before the early
settlers established themselves in the Indo-Gangetic plain.
About a third of all the pheasants in the world are found
in India. The male blue peafowl (the peacock) is the best
known member of the pheasant family and is India’s national
bird. It occupies a prominent place in India’s art, culture
and folklore.
STEP 2
Read the passage again asking yourself questions and answering
them as you read.
l
l
l
l
l
What is the passage about? — Pheasants
Where found? — Asia; particularly India (1/3 of total population)
Origin? — Himalayas
Time? — Long before Indo-Gangetic plain settlements.
Which group of birds? — Order: Galliformes (game birds);
Family — Phasinidae
2019-20NOTE-MAKING
l
l
l
l
91
How many species? — 51
What is the source of information? — ESI chart
What is the purpose of the ESI chart? — Create awareness
among school eco-clubs under NGC
Which is the best known member? — Peacock, India’s
national bird
STEP 3
With the help of the answers note down the main points. Write
the points without full forms of the verbs.
l
l
l
l
l
l
Pheasants — shy birds with bright plumage found largely in
Asia, especially India
Origin in the Himalayas and spread in China, Myanmar, South
and SE Asia.
Order: Galliformes — game birds; Family: Phasinidae
No. of species: 51 (ESI chart)
Purpose of ESI chart — Creating awareness among school
eco-clubs under NGC.
Peacock — India’s national bird, member of this family,
represented in Indian art, culture and folklore.
Notice
l
l
l
Two or three related ideas can be combined into one point.
Use of colons
Use of the long dash
STEP 4
Now go over the facts and number them.
l
This is only to analyse the process of note-making. With
practice you will be able to reach Step 4 immediately, going
through Steps 2 and 3 mentally.
2019-2092
HORNBILL
STEP 5
Finally we go over the facts and number them again.
Read carefully the characteristics of good notes which are given
below.
1.(i) Notes should be short. They should identify the main
point.
(ii) They list information in what is called ‘note form’.
(iii) They are written only in phrases; not sentences.
2.(i) Information is logically divided and subdivided by the
use of figures/letters.
(ii) The divisions are made like this:
Main sections
:
1, 2, 3, etc.
Sub-sections
:
(i), (ii), (iii), etc.
Sub-sub-sections :
(a), (b), (c), etc.
3.Another common method is the ‘decimal’ system.
Main sections
:
1, 2, 3, etc.
Sub-sections
:
1.1, 1.2, 1.3, etc.
Sub-sub-sections
:
1.1.1, 1.1.2, 1.1.3, 1.2.1,
1.2.2, etc.
4.Abbreviations and symbols are freely used. Articles,
prepositions and conjunctions are omitted.
5.Notes must make sense when they are read again otherwise
they will be of no use.
Now read the following text.
The energy stored in coal and petroleum originally came to
the earth from the sun. The bulk of the present-day supplies
was laid down some 200 to 600 million years ago, when
tropical conditions were widespread. Lush, swampy forests
produced huge trees; warm coastal seas swarmed with
microscopic forms of life. When these organisms died, much
of their tissue was recycled as it is today — through
scavenging and decay. But a significant amount of dead
plant and animal material was covered with mud, which
prevented complete decomposition.
2019-20NOTE-MAKING
93
With the passage of time, layer upon layer of the fine
sediment was deposited over the once-living material; the
sheer weight turned the sediments to rock. Sandwiched
between the layers, both coal and petroleum were produced
and preserved under pressure. Coal was formed mostly of
giant fern-like plants that have only small counterparts
today. Coal may still be forming here and there on earth,
but conditions are not right for the production of significant
quantities.
1. Underline the important words and phrases.
2. Write down points without fully expanded verbs, numbering
them as you do.
3. Combine related points.
4. Group related points.
5. Change the verbs to nouns and begin points with them.
6. Number the points.
After you have finished check with the notes given below.
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
Storage of energy from sun in coal and petroleum
Deposit of bulk of supplies 200 – 600 million years ago
Teeming life in tropical conditions
Death of life forms, leading to recycling through decay
Prevention of total decomposition by considerable dead
plants, animals being covered with mud
Solidification of sediment leading to rock-formation
over time
Production of coal, petroleum by compression of organic
matter between rocks
Unsuitability of present-day conditions for coal-formation
2019-2094
HORNBILL
2. Summarising
SUMMARISING follows note-making. The purpose of note-making is
usually for one’s own personal reference. If the main points are
to be reported we present a summary. It is not as severely
shortened as note-making.
Summarising is the selection and paraphrasing of all
important information of the original source. This is done by
analysing the paragraphs/passage in order to formulate a plan
of writing.
The process of summarising would involve the steps followed
in note-making:
1. underlining important ideas
2. writing them down, abridging the verbs
3. avoiding examples, explanations, repetition.
However, instead of nominalising the points (changing
verbs into nouns), we expand the points into full sentences
and link them using suitable connectors. We need to be
precise in our expression. The summary will contain all the
main ideas of the original. Practice in using one word for
many will help.
For example:
l
l
Children who show intelligence far beyond their age often
turn out to be mediocre in adult life.
or
Precocious children often turn out to be mediocre in
adult life.
Her genius was marked by excellence in the various arts,
languages and science.
or
She was a versatile genius.
2019-20SUMMARISING
95
Now read the following text underlining important words as you
go along.
Soybeans belong to the legume family. The beans are the seeds
of the leguminous soybean plant. They can be grown on a
variety of soils and in a wide range of climates. Soybeans are
versatile as they can be used as whole beans, soy sprouts, or
processed as a variety of food items, such as soy milk, tofu,
tempeh, textured vegetable protein, miso, soy sauce, soy oil
and margarine, and soy dairy alternatives. They are also used
for making candles and bio-diesel.
Soy is an excellent source of high quality protein; is
low in saturated fats and is cholestrol-free. It is also rich
in vitamins, especially Vitamin B complex, minerals such
as magnesium, calcium, iron, potassium and copper and
also fibres. In recent times it has been highly
recommended because of its ability to lower the levels of
Low Density Lipoprotein (LDL), a bad cholesterol. The
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), has confirmed that
foods containing soy protein are likely to reduce the risk
of coronary heart disease.
An easy way to take soy is as soymilk now available with
added flavour. Soymilk does not contain lactose (milk sugar)
and can be drunk by those who are allergic to normal milk.
To get soymilk, soybeans are soaked in water, ground and
then strained. If you don’t mind the trouble, you can also
make it at home. (225 words).
Now note down the important points.
l
Soybeans are the seeds of the soybean plant of the legume
family.
l
They grow in a variety of soils and climates.
l
They can be used in various forms — beans, sprouts and a
variety of food items.
l
They are also used to make candles and bio-diesel.
l
They are a source of high quality protein, vitamins, minerals
and fibres. They are low in fat content and cholesterol. They
can lower LDL levels and reduces risk of coronary heart
disease.
l
Soymilk, lactose-free, is available as flavoured milk and can
be drunk by those allergic to ordinary milk and can also be
2019-2096
HORNBILL
made at home by soaking the beans, grinding them and
straining the water. (111 words)
A summary is usually one-third the length of the original
passage. This is about half.
Now think of what we can omit to make the summary more brief
as shown below.
The soybean leguminous plant which grows in all kinds of
soil and climate yields beans, sprouts and a variety of
processed food items and dairy alternatives and is also used
to make candles and bio-diesel.
Rich in protein, vitamins, minerals and fibres, it has a
low fat and cholesterol content. It lowers LDL levels and
reduces the risk of coronary heart disease.
Soymilk which is lactose-free is available as flavoured
milk and agrees with people allergic to ordinary milk. It
can be made at home by soaking, grinding and straining
soybean. (90 words)
Try reducing it further to about 72 words.
Soybean, a legume, growing in a variety of soil and climatic
conditions, yields beans, sprouts and a variety of food items
and is used in making candles and bio-diesel.
Rich in protein, vitamins, minerals and fibres, it is low in
cholesterol and fat. It lowers LDL levels and reduces the risk
of coronary heart disease. Soymilk, lactose-free, is available
flavoured and taken by people allergic to milk. It can also be
made at home. (74 words)
Notice that we have phrases in apposition: ‘a legume’, between
commas; present participles: ‘growing’ to effect reduction. Instead
of ‘it is rich in…’ we have used ‘rich in…’ and postponed the main
verb in the sentence. Almost all the main points have been covered.
Read the text below and summarise it.
Green Sahara
The Great Desert Where Hippos Once Wallowed
The Sahara sets a standard for dry land. It’s the world’s
largest desert. Relative humidity can drop into the low single
digits. There are places where it rains only about once a
2019-20SUMMARISING
97
century. There are people who reach the end of their lives
without ever seeing water come from the sky.
Yet beneath the Sahara are vast aquifers of fresh water,
enough liquid to fill a small sea. It is fossil water, a treasure
laid down in prehistoric times, some of it possibly a million
years old. Just 6,000 years ago, the Sahara was a much
different place.
It was green. Prehistoric rock art in the Sahara shows
something surprising: hippopotamuses, which need
year-round water.
“We don’t have much evidence of a tropical paradise out
there, but we had something perfectly liveable,” says Jennifer
Smith, a geologist at Washington University in St Louis.
The green Sahara was the product of the migration of
the paleo-monsoon. In the same way that ice ages come and
go, so too do monsoons migrate north and south. The
dynamics of earth’s motion are responsible. The tilt of the
earth’s axis varies in a regular cycle — sometimes the planet
is more tilted towards the sun, sometimes less so. The axis
also wobbles like a spinning top. The date of the earth’s
perihelion — its closest approach to the sun — varies in a
cycle as well.
At times when the Northern Hemisphere tilts sharply
towards the sun and the planet makes its closest approach,
the increased blast of sunlight during the north’s summer
months can cause the African monsoon (which currently
occurs between the Equator and roughly 170N latitude) to
shift to the north as it did 10,000 years ago, inundating
North Africa.
Around 5,000 years ago the monsoon shifted dramatically
southward again. The prehistoric inhabitants of the Sahara
discovered that their relatively green surroundings were
undergoing something worse than a drought (and perhaps
they migrated towards the Nile Valley, where Egyptian culture
began to flourish at around the same time).
“We’re learning, and only in recent years, that some
climate changes in the past have been as rapid as anything
underway today,” says Robert Giegengack, a University of
Pennsylvania geologist.
As the land dried out and vegetation decreased, the soil
lost its ability to hold water when it did rain. Fewer clouds
2019-2098
HORNBILL
formed from evaporation. When it rained, the water washed
away and evaporated quickly. There was a kind of runaway
drying effect. By 4,000 years ago the Sahara had become
what it is today.
No one knows how human-driven climate change may
alter the Sahara in the future. It’s something scientists
can ponder while sipping bottled fossil water pumped
from underground.
“It’s the best water in Egypt,” Giegengack said — clean,
refreshing mineral water. If you want to drink something
good, try the ancient buried treasure of the Sahara.
JOEL ACHENBACK
Staff Writer, Washington Post
2019-20S UB - TITLING
99
3. Sub-titling
THE purpose of sub-titling is to convey the main idea or theme of
each section of a long piece of writing. It helps the reader know at
a glance the sub-topics that are being addressed. Giving suitable
sub-titles helps break the monotony of reading long passages.
Read the newspaper article given below and do the tasks
that follow.
A new deal for old cities
The example of Curitiba in Brazil, which has attracted
global attention for innovative urban plans using low-cost
technologies, shows that inclusive development models
for urban renewal are workable.
M
any cities in India accurately ignored fundamental public health
mirr or Friedrich Engels’ issues inherited from colonial rule.
description of urban centres in There is little evidence to show that
nineteenth century England even policymakers assimilated the lessons
today. “Streets that are generally fr om the Surat public health
unpaved, rough, dirty, filled with disaster. State and municipal
vegetable and animal refuse, without governments did not pursue reform
sewers or gutters but supplied with in waste management, though civic
foul, stagnant pools instead,” wrote conditions in Surat itself underwent
Engels on the living conditions of the change in the plague aftermath.
During the past decade, many cities
working class in that country.
pursued development agendas—often
Urban Decay
with the help of massive international
The depths of urban decay in India loans—to project ‘modernisation’ at
came to global notice during the the cost of basic civic reform.
Ther e is thus a continuing
pneumonic plague of 1994 in Surat; it
epitomised the failure of governments challenge before the current mission
in the post-Independence era and to enable and also compel local
exposed development policies that gover nments to abide by the
2019-20100
HORNBILL
provisions of the Municipal Solid
It comes as no surprise therefore
Waste Management Rules by which that pedestrians and bicycle riders,
they are legally bound.
who form 30 to 70 per cent of peak
Post-liberalisation policies have hour traffic in most urban centres,
tended to largely disregard other key also make up a large proportion of
factors that affect the quality of life fatalities in road accidents. A paper
in cities and towns: poverty, lack of prepared by the Transport Research
sanitation, water shortages, gross and Injury Prevention Programme
undersupply of affordable housing, (TRIPP) of the Indian Institute of
and traffic chaos generated by Technology, Delhi, says pedestrian
automobile dependence, in turn fatalities in Mumbai and Delhi were
created by neglect of public transport. nearly 78 per cent and 53 per cent
In the absence of a hygienic of the total, according to recent
environment and safe water supply, data, compared to 13 per cent and
chronic water-borne diseases such 12 per cent in Germany and the
as cholera and other communicable United States.
diseases continue to stalk the poor
Such alarming death rates — and
in the biggest cities.
an equally high injury rate — should
It must be sobering to the affluent persuade policymakers to revisit
layers of the population that nearly their urban planning strategies and
14 million Indian households correct the distortions. But many
(forming 26 per cent of the total) in cities such as Chennai have actually
the urban areas do not have a latrine done the reverse — reduced
within the house, as per the Census footpaths and areas for pedestrian
of India 2001; some 14 per cent have use to facilitate unrestricted use of
only rudimentary ‘pit’ facilities. The motorised vehicles.
number of households without a
The practice in progressive world
drainage connection stands at 11.8 cities has been different. Curitiba in
million (representing 22.1 per cent Brazil, which has attracted global
of households). Migration to cities attention for innovative urban plans
continues and infrastructure to treat using low-cost technologies, has
sewage is grossly inadequate to meet done everything that Indian
the demand even where it exists.
policymakers would dread to do.
It is unlikely that the quality of Starting in the 1970s, this provincial
the urban environment can be centre with the highest per capita
dramatically improved therefore, if ownership of cars in Brazil (other
such fundamental questions remain than the capital) at the time, banned
unresolved.
automobiles from many crowded
Urban transport receives scant areas in favour of pedestrians, built
attention from policymakers. Policy an internationally acknowledged bus
distortions have led to rising system that reduced household
automobile dependency, higher commuting expenditure to below the
safety risks for road users, and land national average, and created new
use plans that are based not on the housing areas that were provided
needs of people, but primarily transport links in a planned manner.
designed to facilitate use of private Some of the prestigious land
motorised vehicles.
development in the city, including a
2019-20SUB-TITLING
101
new Opera House, came up in policies that, ironically, allow filling
abandoned sites such as quarries. of existing wetlands by real estate
The bus-way system cut riding lobbies, leading to flooding. The
time by a third, Scientific American residents then demand expensive
noted in a review in the mid-1990s, new storm water drains.
Examples such as Curitiba show
by providing for advance ticketing,
specially-designed boarding areas that inclusive development models
with wider doors for entry/exit and for urban renewal are workable. If
only the state and local governments
dedicated lanes for faster transit.
In another low-cost initiative, can be persuaded to adopt a rights-
Curitiba managed floods with a based approach to affordable
dedication that Mumbai, Bangalore, housing, sanitation, water supply,
and Chennai can only marvel at. The mobility and a clean environment,
city created large artificial lakes in instead of a market-oriented model
suitable places that filled up in the that lays excessive emphasis on
monsoon, avoiding flooding of recovery of costs incurred by profit-
residential areas. In the summer, oriented private sector service
these lakes turned into parks to provision. Support from a
progressive middle class and trade
provide recreational spaces.
State administrations and urban unions is equally critical to bring
planning bodies in India follow about genuine urban renewal.
G. ANANTHAKRISHNAN
The Hindu, 13 December 2005
Activity
1. Notice the italicised sentence placed at the top of the article
which tells us at a glance what the article is about.
2. Divide the article into four sections based on the shifts in the
sub-topics and give a suitable sub-heading for each section.
One has been done for you in the article as an example.
3. Look for pictures in newspapers and magazines that depict
the urban civic problems discussed in the text. Cut them
out and pin them to the text at appropriate places.
2019-20102
HORNBILL
4. Essay-writing
MOST of us find it difficult to begin writing. We can make this
easier by thinking about the topic either through brainstorming,
that is with several people in a group giving their ideas as they
strike them, or by putting them down on a sheet of paper as
they occur to us.
For example, if the topic is ‘Hobbies’, we can draw a circle and
write ‘hobbies’ in it:
Then we can put down our thoughts as they come to us in a
random manner as shown below.
2019-20ESSAY-WRITING
103
Having done that we select the points and expand each into a
sentence.
1. Hobbies are free-time activities. Examples are stamp-
collecting, painting etc.
2. They are matters of personal choice, not forced.
3. They are interesting and give pleasure.
4. They refresh the mind by providing an opportunity to do
different kinds of activities.
5. They provide relief from monotony.
6. They help us channelise our energy.
7. They can also be useful activities and can provide pleasure
to others. For example, reading out to visually impaired
people, visiting art exhibitions, music concerts etc.
8. Hobbies are educative and they widen our general
knowledge.
9. They help us develop our overall personality.
10. They serve as a medium for the expression of our creativity.
11. We meet interesting people through our common interests
and develop friendships.
We usually begin a topic with a definition or short description.
We could begin thus:
Hobbies are activities that we engage in, in our free time.
We may be interested in needlework, drawing and
painting or music. Other common hobbies are stamp-
collecting, clay-modelling, solving crossword puzzles.
Although hobbies also entail work they are taken upon
through one’s own personal choice. They are not forced
upon us. They are activities that we are really interested
in and hence give us a great deal of pleasure.
Hobbies make life interesting. They refresh our minds
after a hard day’s work. We need to do something different
in order to do our routine work effectively. Hobbies provide
this variety.
Hobbies relieve us from the monotony of daily life.
They fill us with enthusiasm for work and keep our energy
levels high. We will go to any extent to get the things that
we require, to get the utmost joy from our hobbies.
2019-20104
HORNBILL
Hobbies are also useful activities. Quite a few hobbies,
like stamp-collecting, widen our general knowledge about
various countries of the world. When we share common
interests we even get into correspondence with people of
other countries.
This is how we write an essay.
A composition on a particular subject consisting of more than
one paragraph is an essay. The characteristics of a good
essay are:
Unity
:
Coherence :
Relevance :
Proportion:
The essay should deal with the main subject, and
all parts of it should be clearly linked with that
subject.
There should be a logical sequence of thought. This
requires a logical relationship between ideas,
sentences and paragraphs.
Unimportant information should not be included.
Giving more space to the important ideas.
Read the following essay and the passage analysis that follows
it carefully.
The Importance of Games
1. “The Battle of Waterloo was won on the playing fields of Eton.”
These words have been attributed to the Duke of Wellington.
Certainly one does not play games in order to win battles;
neither does the curriculum include them for that reason.
But the importance of games in life should not be
underestimated, for without them it is harder for a person to
be sound in body and mind.
2. For one thing, if a person is to fulfil all the duties that society
expects of him, it is important for him to keep healthy. He
may be very intelligent, but that has little meaning if he cannot
make use of his intelligence, because he is always suffering
from bad health. In some ways, the human body is like a
machine. If it is not made use of, it starts to work badly.
People who are not fit grow weak and become more susceptible
to disease. Any form of game is useful, provided it gives the
body an opportunity to take regular physical exercise.
2019-20ESSAY-WRITING
105
3.
Secondly, playing — and therefore experiencing winning
and losing — encourages the spirit of sportsmanship, thus
enabling one to deal with life’s problems in a wise and natural
manner. Games teach the truth embodied in the Olympic
motto: ‘The important thing in playing is not the winning or
the losing, but the participation’ — and, I may add, doing
the best one can.
4.
We have to remember some other things about playing
games, however. First, it is the physical exercise that is
important for health, not the games themselves, and there
are other ways of getting this. Is not India the home of yoga?
It is also possible to be too interested in games. When we
think of the Greek ideal expressed in the Latin phrase, ‘mens
sana in corpore sano’ (a healthy mind in a healthy body), we
should not forget that it is the mind which is mentioned
first. And if we let games become the most important thing
in our lives, we may be in danger of changing the Olympic
motto to ‘the important thing is winning’.
5.
Nevertheless, in spite of these dangers, playing games can
be a valuable activity, and if we take part in them wisely, we
can gain great benefits.
Passage Analysis
l
l
The writer uses five paragraphs
Each paragraph deals sequentially with a topic.
– Paragraph 1 introduces the subject, and makes a general
statement about the importance of games.
– Paragraph 2 explains the benefits of playing games.
– Paragraph 3 deals with the moral benefits.
– Paragraph 4 deals with the disadvantages and dangers.
– Paragraph 5 sums up the writer’s opinion, taking into
account all he has said in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4, i.e. it
forms the conclusion. The structure (or plan) of the essay
is summed up in the following flow diagram.
2019-20106
HORNBILL
Activity
Here are a few topics for essay writing. Follow the steps listed
above to write on these topics.
1. Himalayan quake 2005.
2. Those who can bear all can dare all.
3. Fascinating facts about water.
4. Public health in transition.
5. Human population grows up.
6. Success begins in the mind.
7. Think before you shop.
The trend of decline in the Child Sex Ratio (CSR)
defined as the number of girls per 1000 boys between 0–6
years of age, has remained unabated till today. To ensure
survival, protection and empowerment of the girl child,
the government has announced Beti Bachao, Beti Padhao
scheme. This is being implemented through a national
campaign. The objectives of this scheme are:
•
•
•
Prevention of gender-biased sex selection elimination.
Ensuring survival and protection of the girl child.
Ensuring education and participation of the girl child.
Organise as essay writing activity in your class, the
themes should be based on the objectives stated above. Mention
how you can contribute to this programme, in the essay.
2019-20107
LETTER-WRITING
5. Letter-writing
LETTER-WRITING is an important channel of communication between
people who are geographically distant from one another. In
earlier times when the telephone and e-mail were not available,
the only means of communication between people was through
letters.
Letter-writing is a skill that has to be developed. In general
there are two types of letters: formal, that are written to convey
official business and information and informal, which are
personal letters to communicate with friends and family. Formal
letters are sent out when we need to write to various public
bodies or agencies for our requirements in civic life. For example,
we might have to ask for a certificate or to inform a change in
our address. A letter is usually one in a series of exchanges
between two people or parties.
Formal Letters
Let us now examine some of the steps in writing formal letters.
1.
(i) Introducing oneself if it is the first time you are writing
(ii) Referring to an earlier letter if you are responding to it.
2. Stating the purpose of the letter
3.(i) Stating action/information required from the addressee
(ii) Explaining action taken/supplying information
4.(i) Urging action to be taken
(ii) Offering assistance in future
This is the basic structure of a letter. It will have to be
modified according to the purpose for which it is written and
the person to whom it is addressed.
2019-20108
HORNBILL
When you write a letter you should keep in mind the following points.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Purpose
Person to whom it is addressed
Tone you should adopt
Completeness of the message
Action required
Conciseness of expression
We have so far considered the content of letters. A letter also has a
typical format.
1. Name and address of sender
Companies have printed letterheads with the name of the
company printed on them. A letterhead may also carry the
name and designation of persons in responsible positions.
2. Name and address of addressee
3. Date
4. Mode of address or salutation
Salutation is the mode of addressing a person. We may have
the following forms.
(i) Dear Sir/Madam (when we are writing to a total stranger
whom we do not know at all).
(ii)Dear Mr/Ms/Dr/Professor + Surname as in: Dear Dr
Sinha, (when it is a formal relationship with the
addressee and the writer does not know him or her
personally).
(iii)Dear Sujata (when the writer knows the addressee
personally and the two share a semi-formal relationship).
5. Reference to previous correspondence, if any.
Most official letters carry a subject line just above the
salutation. This is for quick reference to the subject.
6. Content of letter
The content of the letter begins on the next line and is
arranged in two or three paragraphs.
7. Complimentary close and signature
Letters usually end politely with the following phrases:
Thank you, With regards, With best wishes, Hope to see
2019-20109
LETTER-WRITING
you soon, Hope to receive an early reply etc. The
complimentary close is followed by ‘Yours sincerely/ Yours
truly’, and the writer’s signature in the next line.
Given below is an example of the format of a formal letter.
Ritu Patel
Manager, Customer Services
Vijayanagar Gas Company
121, Ameerpet
Hyderabad 500 016
12 November 2005
Mr Shagun Thomas
801, Vijay Apartments
Begumpet
Hyderabad 500 016
Sub: Your application No. F323 for a new gas connection
Dear Mr Thomas,
——————————————————————————————
——————————————————————————————
——————————————————————————————
——————————————————————————————
——————————————————————————————
With regards,
Yours sincerely,
Ritu Patel
Nowadays all the parts of a letter are aligned on the left. This
style is called the Full-Block style.
l
l
The date and signature are very important in letters.
We do not use commas after every line in the address.
2019-20110
l
l
HORNBILL
Do not begin your letters with hackneyed expressions like,
‘With reference to your letter dated 10 January’. Instead,
use personalised variations like, ‘I was glad to receive your
letter of 10 January…’ or ‘We were happy to note from your
letter that the goods have reached you safely…’
Never end your letters with hanging participles like ‘Thanking
you’ or ‘Awaiting your reply’. Instead write, ‘Thank you’ or
‘We/I await/look forward to your reply’.
Informal Letters
Informal letters include personal letters. If it is a personal letter
the format is flexible. We might just write the name of our city on
top, followed by the date.
Hyderabad
12 November 2005
Dear Sujata,
——————————————————————————————
——————————————————————————————
——————————————————————————————
——————————————————————————————
——————————————————————————————
——————————————————————————————
Bye,
Yours affectionately/With love/
All the best/Take care etc.
(Signature)
2019-20111
LETTER-WRITING
The flexible format of the informal letter may also be used to
seek information from concerned authorities. Given below is
an example.
179 NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New Delhi 110 016
9 September 2005
The Manager
Himachal Tourism
Mall Road
Shimla
Dear Sir,
We are planning to spend our vacation in Dharamsala,
Himachal Pradesh during Dussehra and would like some
information regarding availability of lodging in the area.
We would like to have information about inexpensive
hotels in and around Dharamsala. Could you please
send me a city map and brochures about the activities
and sights in the city?
Thank you.
Yours faithfully,
(Suryadhan Kumar)
Given below is the format of the informal letter.
l
l
Your address (but not your name) usually goes in the top right-
hand corner, but may go on the left too.
The name and/or job title (if you know them) and the address
of the person you are writing to goes on the left.
2019-20112
l
l
l
HORNBILL
To address someone whose name you do not know you
can write: Dear Sir, Dear Madam, Dear Sirs, Dear Sir/Madam.
To address someone by name, use their title and surname
e.g. Dear Dr Balakrishnan.
To end a letter, use ‘Yours sincerely’, if you have addressed
the person by name; ‘Yours faithfully’, if you have begun
the letter with ‘Dear Sir’ or ‘Madam’, etc.
Job Application
At some point of time each one of us will have to apply for a job.
Job applications are usually written in response to
advertisements.
Let us take this sample advertisement from a daily newspaper,
The Hindu dated 15 November 2005.
Come…join the ADVENTURE
Customer Support Executives
Graduate/Diploma holders
with/without
experience
possessing good Customer
Service skills. Excellent spoken
and written communication
skills in English is a must.
Send in your applications with
your resume and passport
size photograph to:
WONDERLAND
COMMUNICATIONS,
SOUTH STREET, SALEM,
TAMIL NADU
Let us assume that you have a degree or a diploma and are
applying for the job. We need to prepare a resume, which actually
means a summary of particulars relating to your background,
academic qualifications and experience, if any. Other terms used
for ‘resume’ are ‘curriculum vitae’ and ‘biodata’.
2019-20113
LETTER-WRITING
The general format of a resume or curriculum vitae is
shown below.
CURRICULUM VITAE
Name:
Address:
Telephone Number:
E-mail ID:
Date of birth:
Academic Qualifications :
Examination
Board/
University
Subjects
Year
Division
S.S.C
Diploma in…
Degree in…
Experience: (Begin from present
employment)
Skills:
Languages known:
Hobbies and Interests:
Achievements:
References: (names of people in positions
like your school Prinicipal who
can certify your character and
conduct)
2019-20114
HORNBILL
Now we need to send a covering letter along with the curriculum
vitae. The following letter is an example.
Your name and address
Date
The Manager
Human Resource Division
Wonderland Communications
South Street, Salem
Tamil Nadu
Dear Sir,
I would like to apply for the post of Customer Support
Executive that you have advertised in The Hindu of 15
November 2005.
I have just completed my Diploma in Communication
from the State Polytechnic. I was happy to note that you
do not insist on experience.
If selected, this would be my first job. I am a sincere,
honest and hardworking person. I am friendly and
outgoing and have good communication skills.
I am enclosing my resume and look forward to meeting
you in person.
Regards,
Yours truly,
(Signature)
Activities
1. You have not received your Roll Number card for the Class
XII examination. Write a letter to the Registrar, Examination
Branch, CBSE asking for it.
2019-20115
LETTER-WRITING
2. Write a letter to the President, Residents’ Welfare Association of
your locality suggesting some measures that could be taken
for solving the problem of water scarcity and conserving water.
3. Write a letter to the editor of a newspaper expressing your
views on the deteriorating law and order situation in your
city.
4. Write a letter to your friend narrating your experiences in a
rescue operation.
5. Write a letter to the Editor of a magazine describing a dance
performance you have seen or an art gallery you have visited.
2019-20116
HORNBILL
6. Creative Writing
T HE teacher was explaining the lines in the beginning of
Shakespeare’s play Macbeth. It was a description of the battle
and the lines were:
Like Valour’s minion, carved out his passage,
Till he faced the slave;
With ne’er shook hands, nor baded farewell to him.
Till he unseam’d him from the nave to the chaps,…
The teacher asked the students what the word ‘unseamed’
meant. It was difficult. The teacher prodded them on. “What
does ‘seam’ mean? Haven’t you ever come across the word?”
One of the students blurted out “Cricket ball”.
This is an example of how each of us reacts to words
according to what our own experience has been.
When we write about factual information, all of us write
almost similarly. But when we write for pleasure each of us may
write about the same event in different ways.
One very important element in creative writing is imagination.
This is reflected in
l
l
l
l
l
l
our view or perspective
choice of words
the comparisons we make
the images we use
the tone we adopt
novelty of ideas.
Let us study the paragraph below.
A town is like an animal. A town has a nervous system and
a head and shoulders and feet. A town is a thing separate
from all other towns, so that there are no towns alike. And a
town has a whole emotion. How news travels through a town
2019-20CREATIVE WRITING
117
is a mystery not easily to be solved. News seems to move faster
than small boys can scramble and dart to tell it, faster than
women can call it over the fences. (from an adapted version of
Steinbeck’s The Pearl)
The topic: A Town
Analogy or comparison: to an animal
Word choice: “has a whole emotion.”
Comparisons: “faster than small boys can scramble and dart,
faster than women….”
We find the first element of imagination operating in the way the
writer visualises the town. Then he extends the primary analogy.
The tone he adopts is light humour, a little sarcastic.
When we begin to write a story or poem we let our imagination
free. We try to say things in a new way. This novelty is what
makes our writing pleasurable to the reader.
Sometimes sentence structures are also different from factual
writing. Consider the following:
They waited in their chairs until the pearls came in, and
then they cackled and fought and shouted and threatened
until they reached the lowest price the fisherman would
stand. (from The Pearl).
In a normal construction we will not use so many ‘ands’. But
the action of the story is best reflected through this kind of
chaining of actions through ‘ands’. It is appropriate to the
movement of the action described.
Let us look at another example:
She dragged me after her into Miss Rachel’s sitting-room,
which opened to her bedroom. At her bedroom door stood
Miss Rachel, her face almost white as the white dressing-
gown she wore.
The author has used a simile: “white as the white dressing-
gown she wore.”
In fact, the whiteness of a human face is because of a strong
emotion — fear or shock.
But here comparing the whiteness to the dressing-gown she
wore serves to exaggerate and intensify the emotion.
2019-20118
HORNBILL
Exaggeration is one of the ways in which fact is distinguished
from fiction.
Now look at these lines from a well-known poem, ‘An Elegy
Written in a Country Churchyard’ by Thomas Gray.
Full many a gem of purest ray serene
The dark unfathom’d caves of ocean bear
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen
And waste its fragrance in the desert air.
The stanza carries a simple statement: many people with
outstanding qualities live and die unnoticed by the world.
To state this, the poet has used two strong images, ‘a gem’ and
‘a flower’.
He has used two contrasting places: the ocean, that is full of
water and the desert with no water at all.
Also notice the rhyming words: ‘serene’ and ‘unseen’, ‘bear’ and ‘air’.
The first and third lines also begin with the same words —“full
many a”. The lines are of equal length.
All this together contribute to the literary quality of these lines.
Activity I
Put down the images that come to your mind immediately when
you see the words in the box.
cat
cupboard
wall
pond
bird
Activity II
Try to write four lines of poetry or four sentences of prose with
one of these as the starting point.
Activity III
Write a short story beginning with this sentence:
When the last of the guests left, I went back into the hall.…
Activity IV
Look for a story, a poem and a newspaper article on
environment conservation and see how the style of each is
different from the other.
2019-20